Requested Title: A CURE FOR JEALOUSIE
Authors: John Corye
Matched Alias: A cure for jealousie
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_eighteenth-century_a-cure-for-jealousie-a-_cory-john-actor-and-dr_1701
Source Title: A cure for jealousie. A comedy. As it was acted at the New Theatre in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by His Majesty's servants. 1701
Source Author: Cory, John, Actor and Dramatist.
Source Date: 1701
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/cure_for_jealousie_1701_djvu.txt
Notes: Curated salvage from a direct Internet Archive title match for John Cory's A cure for jealousie. The title-page OCR is rough, so extraction starts at the first clear act heading.

---
ACT 1. SCENE I. The Piazza, Covent Garden. 
Enter Loveday, to him Wildilh. | 


24 u HAT thinking Mortal have we hear? -— Any of 
2: my Sober Acquaintance, Faith Ned Loveday —— 
3 Fortnnate -- Good Morrow to your Meditations 
4 Sir, When came you from the Wells? 

Toveday. Laſt Night--- I ftaid as long as *twas worth while -- When all 
the Game were fled, *twas ig time for me to be upon the Wing. 
Wild. But why ſo dejected, don't the Waters agree with you? 

Loved. The Waters were the leaſt of my buſineſs---- * Wives, and de- 
cay d Courtiers drink the Waters. * 

Wild. Prithee what was your buſineſs? | 

Loved. The ſame yours is at the Change, or a Beau at the Play-houſe, Cu- 
® 1iofity, not Profit; The good Company left the Town, and | purſued it to 
= Tunbridge. | 

Wild, Pleaſant, You went thither for Converſation, and ſnun it here, elſe 
why alone in this place · But that ] know you, I ſhou'd take 01 for ſome 
petty Dabler in Helicon ; Certain y you are turn'd Lover, or rea — 
. Loved. Perhaps you have hit my mo 1 


"ITY — — — —„ _ 
2 Cie for TE AL OU SI E. 

Wild. A deſperate one keep off; --- The Infections catching - .- tis time 
for thee to ſingle from the Herd of Mankind --- thou'rt a Blown Deer, tbe 
Critiques have been. upon thee, and no man of Reputation will be ſeen in 
thy Company. f 

Loved, Vou ſpeak very Contemptibly of that Great Name, A Poet is; not 
ſo deſpicable. 4 

Mila. Let me be Jack pudding to ſome Mountebank, or Foot man to a Viſi- 
ting Lady rather -- If I thought this in earneit, 1 ond give you over--- 
for of all Madmen the moſt deſperate is the poor Wretch who raves for a 
Muſe; Writing for the Stage is taking a world of pains to be a Publique 
Als --- The poor Scriblers who make it their Livelyhood, had detter be At- 


torneys Hacks, they don't Ber Bread, 
Lived, Malice? 


Wild. Tis a. Miracle-to me that ſuch a glut of Poets daily ſpring up, when 
they are ſo conſtantly nipt in the Bud. 24 
Loved. Good Ones were ever ſcarce --- but 'tis a Fatallity attends little 
Traders in Wit, thoſe Cammomile Authors, who grow the faſter for being, 
trod down, to be ſtill writing, and get nothing by't. my 
Wild: But repentance, Ay Ned, theſe are the diſmal effects of poverty, bY 
I doubt if this world holds, we muſt all bs Wits in our turn. 1 
Loved. No ſuch. danger --- But prithee Jack where haſt thou liv'd this 
Summer? * 
Wild. | have Sojourn'd with. my Uncle, who wou'd neither let me live 
here, nor afford me Money to live elſewhere, 1 
Loved. Neither livd here, nor elſewhere --- Riddles! Were you no where? ty 
Wild. Yes, yes, I was here, but 1 did not live here; Pleaſure the Soul of. 
living was a ſtranger to me; And what went moſt to Heart with me, I ſaw þ 
the poor M hores ſtarve and hadn't to relieve them. 

Loud A- great Grievance to a Man of your publique Spirit truly. ; 
Wild. If I chanc'd to wander towards the P/ayhouſe, I was forc'd to watch 
the Muſique, and when the Curtain aſcended, I vaniſht. MN 

Loved, Oh that's as Faſhionable now, as Sharping an Act in the ſide Rox. 
1 id. It was not ſo much defigy, as pute neceſſity - 1 confider'd (Lana 
. conſidering Perſon) if 1 ſpent my half Crown at the Play, I might want it 4 
at the Tavern, and 1 always prefert d Claret to Poetry, 4 
Sp, ee Then thy Uncle remains an lufdel, what, no hopes of his 
hon! 3 
- wild. Converſion! tis Nature, and you might as ſoon per ſwade a Wo- 
man ſhe's Ugly, or a Conceited Beau he is ill qreſsd, az him to be Generous. 
Loved. Have we not feen an Example of it in Sir Ihn Tbriveweil latelß ? 
who was (if poſſible) more Covetons then your Uncle, but ſenſible now that 
his Sons late Misfortune was chiefly cocalonen by his Severity, he is from a 
Miſer become an Extravagant. 
Wild, Ay, Ay, Now he has ruin'd poor Frank, he's liberal —— thele old 
Bellows always repent when Us too late. 


"a ? 


Loved: 


d 


Eure for FEALOUSTE YN 


Loved. Love appears in both extreams - he hoarded bu: t' enrich his Son, 


and Squanders it away becauſe he can ne're enjo) it. 


Wild. I dont like laying up for Poſterity--- hereafter in life is to me a Je! 


the preſent moment is the only time for er joyment- give me plealures 
whilſt I am vigor ous, brisk, and young---a Wench or a Bottle at Seventy, 
when Age has pall d our Sences, and Appetite runs low, is Iike good Mu':que 
to a man ina Dead Sleep. 


— 


Loved A mere Epicure Jack, you look no farther then to day. 
Wild, Ves, yes, to to morraw when it comes yet I thank my Stars fortune 


' = did caſt an Eye of regard upon me, I made a ſorry ſhift. 


Los ed. What? | 
Wild. A Female Convenience, a kind Benefactreſs. 

Loved. Cant (afide) her name ? | 

Mild. Is not to be divulg?d---tar diſcoveryes of this kind, Freind of mine - 
a Miſtris is a Secret not to be Comunicated. | 

Loved. You domt count her a Miſtris that is ſo very Bountiful ? 

Wild. Doctors differ--- She's your Miſtris I find whom you court, and pay, 
give me a woman that makes a frank invitation to a good Entertainment, and 
rewards the Gu:ſt for his Company, here's a mixture af pleatn-e and profit. 


Loved, You are a provident Sinner a meer Trader in Love- - but prithee 


Wild:ſþ who is ſhe ? You know | can be cloſe. 
Wild---Oace again, no Names Ned thus much dare tell you; - 2 wife ſh: is 


both brisk, and young-her Husbaad is old, and | hope rich; eaſy 1 am jure 


he is, and fice from that cui ſt feind Jealouſy which haunts my Uncle, and 
ma kes poo Arabella ſo miſerable. f 

Loved. \impo:ence naturally breeds ſuſpition -an old Man without Jeal-u{y 
is a greater Rarity chen a hantome wench without Pride, or a Celebrated wit 


without Vanity, Age and Vouth are mere Contraryes—Summer and Winter 


don't agree leſs, how does the Lady bear it? 


* Wild. Wonderfully — ſhe only is Blind to what all the World b:fides ſee as 5 
plain as day, her Confidence is great as her Innocence, and ſhe neyer dreams 


my Uncies Jealoos, knowing ſhe never gave him Cauſe. | 

: — were Charity to undeceive her Jack—did ſt thou ncver attempt 

it, ha | | 
wild. Alack, alzck, the woman is irrecoverably vertuous, there's no asking 
her a Civil Queſtion, for ſhe*s always at Prayers. | 


Loved. Your only time, if you ever intend to Cuckold the old Fellow, it muſt 


be when his wite's at prayers —temptation is always ſtrongeſt about em 
when they petition againſt jit—l tell thee Boy tis a womans Critical minute 
what Church does ſhe ue? | | | 45 
Wild. Our own Church here Covent Garden. _ | 
Loved. Better ſtill Devotion there is always the 1:aſt part of the Serv oe 
Women now take as muchcare to appear Religious as their Vene ate Grand- 
mothers did to be ſo- And are at as much pains to b: Hypocrites, as we utd 


Qualifiethem tar Saints. What Male Acquiittance have you fickt up this ta- 


ſon? You love Variety. B2 V, id 


— 


- 


ask me now, pray Sir, why did you Marry for Beauty? I am not ſuch a fool 


4 A Cweſor FEALOUSIE. 
Mila. Ses ſonably hinted, I bad like to have paſt that point over in filence— 
Gad Ned thou wilt own thy ſelf obliged to me for ever, ſuch a Companion—1 
dflie Europe to match him for thy humour. : 

Lovea-- What is he? | 
Mild. A man of War, Witty, Generous, and Brave—in ſhort every thing 
you would deſire in a Frierd or good Fellow—he goes among us by the name of © 
Colicnel Blunt — how he ſurports his Splendour I know not, but can aflure ou 
he makes no inconſiderable Figure—if you'l take a Battle at the Foſe tis 
odds [ give you a fight of him. 
Loved. With all my Heart, but one bottle let it be. 
Frud. Agreed, I intend to reform. 
Lo: ed. When your Uncle does. . Extum 


Scene Changes to Scrapeaiis Honſe. 
Emter Scrap. Solus. 


Scrap. I myſt be Married, Married at theſe years; and I muſt have a young 
Wife, and a handſome Wife---Hum / Was not I mad, ſtark mad---odsbud 
that ever a Man ſhoy'd live to the years of Dotage. Suppoſe any body ſhould 


ral -- beſides I can hardly diſtinguiſh whether ſhe is handſome or no---for Wit 
then? no, that is the high road to Eeggary, I never car'd for't in my life--- 
for Money then? that, that's the Tempter--- Money is a prevailing Argu- 
ment---methinks I cou*d do any thing for Money ſtill but wed another Ara. 
hella Money is a good, I may ſay the greateſt good, therefore the more 
Money the better ··· but then a young Spouſe is a great Evil, nay I find her 
the greatelt of Evils--- O Mammon ! 3:mmon! thy Luſtre dazzl'd my Eyes, þ 
and I leapt headlong into Perdition. - - Then I have a Spend thrift Nephew 
too will certainly undo me-- wou'd he would play ſome ſuch Tyburn trick +» 
23 young Thrivewell did, and run the Country for it---Odsbud lle make him 
do't if I can -I won't give him a Groat this Twelve-month, if he will * : 
whore and drink, let him pad fot t, and ſwing when he has done. Oh my 
Head! Oh my Purſe ! | | | 


but I can tell tis all Outſide and Daubing---not one good Face in ten Natu- x | 
K 
bn 


Enter Arabella 


Arab. Are not you well Sir? 
Scrap. No, no, you take care I ſhant be well (aftde)- 
Arab. Where does your Pain lye ? 
- Scrap. Here, I have it in my head 0h! Oh! 1 ; 
Arab. Let me hold it---alas Dear you are very Feaveriſh, your Pulſe beats 
bigh---will you go to bed? | 
- Scrap. My Pulſe beat, quoth a---my horns ſprout under her Fingers and 
ſhe takes them for Pulſe. (iat) . 


A Cure fo TEALOUSIE. 


Arab, How long haws you been thus out of Order? 

Scrap. About a quarter of a Year, | 

Arab | never heard you Complain beiore---I thought ycu were not well, 
yau toſt and tumbled ſo a nights,--where did t take youat firſt ? 

Scr ap. At _— juſt Judgment upon me far never going there but for 
Intereſt. 4 Ko | 

Arab, It may be dangerors you have let it run ſo long without taking care 
pray Love let me put you to bed, and get ſomething warm. 

Scrap. i am in her way now (/ide} no, no, Vie not go to bed wife. 

2 pray Husband do, yon are hot, exceeding hot, I le ſend for AMithri- 
date the Apothecary, he ſhall preſcribe you ſomewhat. | 

Screp, A ſmooth fae d Raskal - he*t be worſe than a Fir of the Gout to meſ a- 
fide) le have no Apothecaryes, they will but make my bead ake worſe, and my 


Furſe muſt pay for t. ; 
nter Sr, John Thiivewell. 


Sir Jon; So, ſo- this is as it ſnouſd be--you find Son Ser ape the Comforts 
of Marrying a young wife and you ſez Arabella what a happineſs tis to have 
an old Husb+nd- -1 xn2w had you heen left to your own giddy Choice, you 
wou d have been for a young Feilow that wou'd have ruin d j ou in a year or 


tro. ; : | 
Ar. b. I always ſubmitted my Will to your better Judgment Sir, not 
doubting of your Fatherly Love and Care. F 
Sir Jobn. You ſay well, and I hope | have ſhewed them, in matching you 
to a Diſcreet Sober Man--- 1 wiſh. 1 could tell where to provide as well for 
your Siſter Bellinda. 
Aab. 1 hope ſhe't be wiſe enough to provide for her ſelf. (aſide. 
Sir John. Son Scrapeall, what's the matter, you look dull. + 
Arab He is ill Sir, with a violent pain in his Head. 
Sir Jobi. | am ſorry to hear it, 'tis nothing but a Dizzineſs or fo, | hope 
twill be ſoon over. | a | 
Arab. He has had it a great while Sir, almoſt. chree Months without uſe- 
ing any Remedy —— I with there may be nothing breeding in his Head. 
© Scrap. 7 Shakss his Head ] Ay, ay, ſhe knows my Diſtemper well e- 
aſide. nough. | | 
Aab. Pray Sir, try if you can perſwade him to Bed. | 
Scrap: No, no, Miſtreſs Il wont —— tis only a little Dizzineſs as Sir 
John fays — I hare it now and then by fits — I begin to find my ſelf ſome- 
what better already adod | dare not tell the true Cauſe. 

Sir Johw, I told you it would over I am taken ſo my ſelf ſometimes, but 
Son Scrapeall the chief defign of my preſent viſit is to adviſe. 5 
Scrap. I am mightily oblig'd to you Sir — I had rather he would adviſe 
his Daughter («fide | | 
Sir Jolm. You have a Nephew, | h 

 $5r4p. A Lewd Idle Rogue Sr: 


— 


- 
- — 


EF. Woe TEALOUSTE 


Sit John lan informed you don't allow him like a Gentleman. 

Scrap- Why Sir John he will ruin me, impoveriſn me--he won't leave me 
worth a Groat, | 

Sir John. Impoſlible ! I hear you donẽt give him a competency to live. 

Scrap. To live! no by my troth at his rate of living-- $life, Sir, he 
Whores, Games, and Drinks, at that abominable rate, he would run out the 
Kings Revenue” in leſs time then*cis gathered. | 

Sir John You wrong the young Gentleman, I dare fay--come, come, Son 


we mult make large allowances for Youth—too much ſtrictneſs is rank 


* 


Tyranny. 
Scrap. I am afraid Sir, your Doctrine tends. to Rebellion. 


Sir Jeb», Alas they are Truths, which experience, ſad experience teaches 


Me. 
Enter Maid. 


Maid Madam one within deſires to ſpeak with you. 
Arab. | coms. | (Exeunt Arab. and Maid.) 
_ © Scrap Ha--where's my Wife /---gene---her Gallant is come to ſee her 
theſe Fops buzz about her as thick as //a/psin a Confettioners Shop ( aſide) Oh 
my head Oh! | 
Sir John. How now, the fit return'd ? 
Scrap. Violently, worſe then ever--Imuſt to bed I can endure it no longer. 
Sir. John. I came to talke with you about Mr. Wilarſh---but lle take ſom 
more convenient tim*--g?mor row Son, 1 wiſh you your health. (Exit, 
Scrap. Your humble Servant good Sir Jahn This Jealous Devil fo poſ- 
{es me that I can neither eat, nor ſleep- ſne may be honeſt- but I fancy ſhe 
is not--ſhe has given me no canſe--yet cis reaſon ſufficient fhe is young, and 
wanton--I old, and feeble, what had | to do to marry then? becauſe I was a 
doting fool — Who's there? (Euer Servant.) 
where's your -Miſtris ? © | 
Serv. Gone to Church Sir. 
Scrap. Where*s Olinda ? 
Serv, In her Chamber Sir. : | 
Scrap--Bid her come hither ( Ex. Ser, )«Gone to Church! I don't like this 
going to Church---1t can*t be in the nature of a Woman to go twice a day to 
Church out of pure Zeal- I doubt her worſhip is ſuperſtirious--I wiſh the has 
not her male Saint to addreſs to. I muſt ſet my Daughter to-watch--I te pro- 
miſe her mountains if ſhe makes any Diſcovery--:*ut ſhe*s a young Baggage, 
and they're all in Confederacy to promote Cucto/dom--I had better Imploy 
Daſh, he is honeſt, and will tell me all he knows. | 


Dos > 2 5 he” Mine: 


Otind, Have you any Commands for me Sir? | 5 
Scrap Odsbud 1don't know whether 1 had beſt truſt her (aſide) 
Olind. You ſeem diſorder d Sir, does any thing trouble u Scrap. 


— 


„ 


* x THE nw * 8 
* -* 
— . * * 
= 
= *, * 


9 2 


8 


i 


on 


LS 
* 
MW, 


C% 2.4 2 4 . —_ 
2 y My 2 - 1 
* 3 * 6 
| : 


© Ta * o 
* OL : 2 
2 4 > * A 
= ag” # * 
, , web 


— 2 r RR” SE 
be ts * g J E 3 N 
"- j Tz = 
2 — 
- 8 : 4 


* EE” 


2 4 P 


r * 
4 Py 


W 
2 


* 1 % 2 2 re 
of * 7 4 *. As 


n 0 l 
1 
2 


learnt enough to confirm me of my good Fortune. 


A Cure for JTEALOUSIE. he. 
Scrap. Dofſt love me Girl? 
Olind. ] hope I never gave you cauſe to think otherwiſe, tis my Duty Sir. 

Scrap. True--Ard ist not a Wiſes Duty to love her Husband? do'ſt 
think Arabella loves me? | | 

Olind. I gueſs now where the Shoe pinches (ſide) doubtleſs Sir. 

Scrap. | am afraid ſhe loves ſome body elſe better. 

. Or ſhe is not of my mind) —— who pray Sir? 

Scrap. I can*t tell that but you young Folks know one anothers minds 
— do you think if you marryed an old man you ſhou d love him better then 
2 young one ? 

Ol: Heaven grant I ma never make the trial (aſide) if he were my Huf- 
bard,tho' ne're to old, it were my Duty to love him above the world. 

Sorap. You are com: again with your duty —1 dont ask what you ought to 
do. but what your Inclinat:on would prompt you to. 5 

Ol: The Old Gentleman is horn mad, Fle try to increaſe his Jealouſy 
Nay, Sir if you wou'd know my undiſſembled thoughts oi the matter, if my 
Bl Stets (which Heaven avert!) thon'd couple me with an old Fumbler, my 
Incl inations wouꝭd certainly lead me to a Gallant. 

Scrap. T hey wou'd -— 

Ol. Daubt.cls Sir? Nis unreaſonable to think contrary Elements ſhou'd 
*gree. | 
. Then you conclude your Father's a Cuckgld— death I'm mad. 

Ol You Sir, I don*t count you old. 

Scr. hreeſcore is net old Hully. 

Ol: Not in ſuch a healthful Conftitutionas yours Sir I meant one of 
Fourſcore whoſe whole motion was by Crutches, and marryed me only to be 
his Nurſe—yours's is a diſcreet Age, not at all deſpicable, 

Scrap. My fears | ſee are n't groundleſs, ſhe knows more of this matter 
then I'm aware off, if I cou?d but get it out of her, theſe young Sluts are all 
good at Diſſembling, 'tis born with them, and there's no truſting any of. 
them. (aſide) Go, and ſend Daſh to me. (Ex. Olinda) What a miſerable 
Man have I made my ſelf ? Methinks I am a Brck of the firſt head, my Bran- 
ches ?re ſpread abroad, and I cou'd Butt with any ofthe Born'd Herd. 


Paſh. Did your Worſhip call? 
Serap. Oh Daſh, | am Married. 
Daſh Yes Sir. 

Scrap. And I am. 

Daſh. What Sir? 

Scrap. A Cuckhold. 

Daa How Sir. 


Scrap. Moſt certainly Olinda knows all, but won't diſcover, yet I — 
wy 


- 


8 I Ce ſo JEALOUSIE. 
Daſb. I never lik'd the Match — your Worſhip knows I advis'd your. 
Werſhip, and told your Worſhip, — bon 
Scrap. Ay, ay, 1homas we are always wiſe too late, and buy our Expe- 
rience too dear did'ſt chou never obſerve any thing? : 

Daſh. Not I truly Sir — but Vie watch her for the future, and bring 
Four VVorſhip an exact Account. : | 
Scrap. Pritnee do good Daſh — watch her every where, but be ſure 
watch her at Prayers —- yet now I think on't ſhe ſhall go to Church no 
more —— I had rather be indited for an Atheiſt, then pointed at for a 
Cuckhold —— ſhe gots abroad no more—— mind who comes home to her. 


Daſh. | ſhall Sir. 
Scrap. Sure I am doubly curſt with th? two worſt Plagues of Life, ' 


A Spendthrift Nephew, and a Jiking YVife. Exeum. 


SCENE, the P:azzg. 
Euer Blunt aud Pimpwell. 


Blum. Well Sirrah, we have been almoſt a week in Town and no body 
- knows me - this Patch, after ſeven years adience has diſguiz'd me from my 
moſt inti nate Acquaintance. — ilaiſu and the reſt of my Fellow Sinners 
know me no otherwiſe then by the Name of Blunt. I have not yet had 
Opportunity to i:quire how my Father ref:nts my loſs, if he ſtill retains his 
Caverous Humour, | will be ſtill what Ifeem ; But thank our Stars we are in 

London, th: place of the World 1 admire molt. = 

Pimp. Thank our Stars we are any where but at Sea, the very thought of 
the Sea inr2s my Head and Stoin:ch, wou'd any man with a dram of Brains 
here, venture his All, on that incouſtant Element — — catch me there a- 

ain — and throw me to the Sharks, little Londm for my money. 

Blunt. This indeed is Pieaſures Empire, here ſhe nas fixt her Seate, and 
the whole World brings in its Tribute to ſupport her Grandeur ; here all 
Lifes ſatisfactions are at their heighth, aud er joy refin'd to pleaſe the 
Niceſt / ppetite. Beauty and Mirth ſuccellive:y regale our Sences, and the 
pleas'd Soul enjoys it's largeſt wiſhes 

Pimp. A moſt delicious place Sir, ſtick cloſe to it—— I wiſh my old Ma- 
ſter had tipt off decently. then we need not have left it. 
_ Blamt. Thou wilt never make a Columbus, Pimpmwell. 

Pimp. Hum / a Columbus — what the Devil is that ? This Learning is 
plaguy troubleſome to a mans underſtanding. I won't diſcover my Igno- 

- Jance however (aſide) not I Faith Sir, I had rather be a Bum bailiff. 

Blunt. Carry this to my Fathers —— ?tis a further confirmation of the 
Report I ſpread concerning my own death---bring me an Anſwer imediately, 
I ſhall bz at the Reſe or at my Lodgings. (Ex: Pimpw. 


.. 


Arabella 


A Cure for J EALOU SIE 
Arabella and her Maid croſs the Stage, Pimp following ar 4 diftance. 


Bluxe. By Heaven a Charming Creature ! wou'd ſhe were marryed to ſome 
Old Uſurer, I'd do my part to tend him to Heaven 1 wou d not have her a 
Maid for the world, for tho? I love her as much as is poſſible at firſt fight, 1 
wouf'd not marry her, and to debauch her were down right Villany. Now 
is my Rogue out of the way at this nice juacture, wou'd he were here—— _ 

Pimp. At your Service Sir. bx 

Blunt. What delivered the Letter already? A 

Pimp. No Sir, I ſtarted this Game by the way, and cou*'d not for m Soul 
help following them, | : 2 

Blunt A true bred Cur beat on — ſee where they ſettle. 

Pimp. They are your own Sir, they are your own. 

Blunt. How dof'ft know? © 

Pimp. Know Sir, why they are gone to Church. 

Blunt. What then? 

Pimp. I never knew any of em fail in my life -I can tell by Experieace—— 
Ile tell you an Adventure I had in a Chapple at 3rufſels — 

Blunt, Damn your Adventures lle hear none of your Ly es. 

Pimp. Pray Sir hear it. ND eb), 8 

Blunt. Hold your prating Sirrah, or Ide crack your Skul. 

Pimp. Gad Sir, | had as live you ſhou'd, as interrupt me. 

Blunt. DO” Mutter Ras kal. ( Beats him off. 

With eager ſteps I'le chaſe this flying Fair. 
As ſhe to Heaven, ſo will I kneel to her, 
She can't deny a ſuppliant Lovers Prayer. 


| The End of the Firſt Ack. 


CE 


—_ 8 — —_— FW AF 


* 
— 


ACT II. Scens 4 23 the Roſe. | 


Loveday and Wildiſh at a Table Drinking, 


1 


Wildiſh Hama Ned why ſo Melancholy, dull over thy Bottle, h:h? Theſe 
| are ſtrange alterations — if water drinking brings a man to this, 
Heaven ſend me Grace to ſick to my Bottle — here Man cheer up — 
thou art worſe Company then a teſty Lawyer ia Term time- . 
 Loveday. I may be merryer then you imagine my Paſſions are rt legible 
in my Face — a imiling Countenance is no more a ſign of Ch:erſulneſs; then 


a Bullyes dread Whiskers are of Courage. my 
* ** Wild. 


- 10 Cure for a 
Wild. Then you are Merry, and Sad, and your Friends know it not, I love 


ag * . - 


my friend ſhould ſee my very Seul. : . 

Loved am not of the Number then elſe you wouꝰd have let me known 
your Padrena. wy N 1 * a ; | 
Mila. A Woman is an Exception to my Rule--their Reputations are tender, 


and nruſt not be blown upon---Scandal is open Mouth d, ſet it once a going, 


and ſtop it if you can, you ſhall know all that I may tell you with Honour, and 
he is not m friend who preſſes me farther. 


* * 


Loved” I know your Honvur;and dare rely upon it · a Secret I ſe is ſafe with 
you, and therefore | truſt you, with what concerns the future quiet of my 


Life. : 5 

ld No Plots Ned, I ſhan't care to ſwing for Company. 
Loꝛed. N orhing {0 1 you*l laugh at me. 
Wild. Like enough (aſide) you wrong my Friendihip. 
Loved. Why then lam — deſperately in Love. 
Wild. Ha, ha, ha | | 
Loved | knew you'd mock my follies, 


Wild Ha, ha, ha, who can ferbear laughing to hear thee cry I'm in love, 


with that grave Phiz-—why ſo have | with a Thouſand ſcveral Women. 


f oved. Your's was a ſordid flame, a brutal Paſſion, Luſt not Love, how efre 
u jiſtly term'd ſo-thus ſaperſtition is by /dolateys called Zeal, Hypocricy 


miſnam d Piety, and aſanQify'd Appearance paſles for Holineſs, 
Wild. There are Cheats in Love, have a Care Ned your Miſtreſs does not 


prove one Lovers are biind, or at leaſt ſhort ſighted, and ſee leſs then 
their N2ighbours— Eut prethee to what fair one, dos Love owe thy Conver- 


Aion ?--- let me judge. 
Loved. One that Heaven fram'd the brighteſt of her Sex, 


Fair beyond all that fancy can deſign, 


Or Flattery invent, ſo Beautiful - 
1 hat Nature ſeemꝭd t have Summon'd all her Art, 
And in Compoſing her, excell d her ſelf. 

Wild, Mad by this light. is ſhe not a Woman ? 


Toved. So far above the Common rank of Women, ſo near approaching to 


D:vinitv, ſhe ſeems all Soul. 


ud. Gone, beyond recovery, ba, ha, ha, all Soul- an Er rot in Philoſophy--- 


the Learned doubt whether they've any, if they have - {ure thou art the 


firſt Young fellow ever lov'd that in a Miſtriſs--*tis time enough to admire 


their Souls, when their Bodyes are decaying, if ever I doat on a Womans 


Soul, it ſban'r be till ſn ud enough to be a Sybil. | 
Loved. You talk mad!y. | 


i Let any one that is not a Lover be Judge, who's talk is madder yours, 


or mige - but her name? 
'  Lowed. Han't I deſcribed her ? 


Wild. Yes, as Chimiſis do their great Elixir, fo extravagantly that no body 
believes em · it you are no better at a likeneſs, jou muſt ev n write her 5 U 


Botto 


— * * 


* 


\ | 3 


SHITE 4 Cure for JEALOUSIE WP 
Loved. Who but Belinda, could have wrought this ſudden change? I who 
was always an Heretick io Love, ckarm'd with the ſight of this furprizing fair, 
am now become his humbteſt votary. 
Her killing Eyes reſiſtleſs Arrows dart, | 
5 Like Lighrning wound, and pierce the very heart. 
5 Wild, A perfect Lyma!ith - he rhimes in's Fits. 
£ Loved, No longer laugh, but Pity me. 
Vila. I do, heartily. | 
8 Loved. She's cold as Ice my freind, 
Wild. Thaw her then. | 
W- - Loved, Such ſevere Virtue all het Actions ſhew, 
Such Awful Majeſty tempers her every look, | 
As forbids hope, and dooms me to diſpair. Fi 253 wane | 
$7. Dee Womans Ontſide, for io the wiſeſt of us are deceiv'd, 
2 -- They always come abroad in Maſque rade, and appear barefaced but to one 
another, for ſhame Ned, thou art a meer Platonick, Loves virtuous C, ttuit 
an old Gamſter, to play cautiouſly is not the way to win---fling boldly, and 


they I like you the better for't, he bids faiceſt for the favor, that ſnatches it, 
come, Fle preſeribe you an experienced Remedy ig e 
Loved. No faith Vidiſh L can t ſtay now, I have almoſt ſlipt my time 
MWild. le not part with you, till I've perfornid this pious Cure, but firſt 
>; more Wine. (Knocks) Las” | | 
Drarner. Coming Sir, coming---Mr. YY/diſh the Collonel is in the Houſe en- WE 
— quiring for you. 

: 0 ild. Deſire him to walk u 'm glad he's come to my Aid , now for - 
Remedy --] was once poſſeſt y ſelf for.two or three days, till I became ſuch a- 

=> nother puling Coxcomb as thou art 'now,---ſtill: reſtleſs and uneaſy -- I fun d. 

© * Converſation; and ſought Solitude. — But when 1-fouad this wou'd not do; 

I betool my Elf to _Sprightly, Burgwndy, ſent for an old;Aquaintance, of, the 

x other Sex, fancyed her to be the Woman 1 pined for, and ſo cur'd my (elf. gf; - 


* 
i 
4 

* 


f che e e e the grperiment, 7 ddl lg 4 e V n | 
ib Lared Not at all —Yow preſgribe like a Qaack and give the ſame. . 
1 ns. 2 5 | 


| edicine to all Conſtitutio ; 2340 G 0 ene 
Vila. I dont know what Alterations this Plaguy Love has made in you, 
but 2 Months ſince our Conſtitutions hexe ſome hat a kin thou baſh ; 
n LuMY 13633057) N. N B00 n 340% fr 20G A M 
T 3 N 5 | * 2 0 Led Vit 
? fl 3 TW AQO XK n . | wn | 
'vy Blunt. And few lobe em better 71 cat 140 that for Jack. Wildifo. 2 ? 
T Loveday ) (ſtarts)  - | 
Mild No ſtarting Collonel 


2 


93 


- you are wellcome to my friend, he's an 
em at preſert, 
have been at him ali eady. 


Wonelt fellow when he's in his Senſes, but he's a little out of 
ithee Coll-rel try what you can do for him 
. What is the Gentlemans Ail ? 


Ca 


= 


12 A Cire for IE ALO US IE 


Wd. Nay the truth on is his Condition is very bad ——— he is heart 
fick —— Cid has ſhot him through and through. 
blunt. His Cure's before kim, tis an infallible Remedy for all Falpitatioas 


at the heart. 
ty” la. If he had the Grace to get it down 1 know *twould do. 
Blunt. If this wont, there's that in Youſe will. 
Loved \oul Pardon me Sic. 


Wi Stay, ſtay, let the Collone! try iis Experiment. 


Enter [5-: wer; 


Drawer O'you call Gentlemen? | - 
Blunt. More Wine --- and d'you hear? (whiſpers) 
| Drawer Yes Sir. | (Exu Drawer.) War 
Loved. No Women I beſeech you Sir, they are grown more tireſome to 
me now, then they have been entertaining. | 
N *T were an ill time for the poor Souls if all the Young Fellows thought. | 
ſo—— will you be cured, or are you mad enough to marry her? : 
Led Marry her { with all my Sou'- tis what next Heaven I long for moſt. 
id Religiouſty ſpoten, you need not fear her, Ned 4 
| Lovedays Eſtate, and Merits,miy P'ea1delert to any Ladyes favour. * 
- £oved. I would be a Scurvy Plea, for ſure no Man can deſer ve her. 


| Enter Peggy 1 
Blunt. Here's one will divert yon with a Song 3 g'morrow Peggy. | a 
Peg Your Servant Coll. Oh Mr. Lovedsy, where have you hid this Sum- 
mer-- | han't ſeen yon an Age. * 
Wild. Nor don't fee him. 
© Peg. Not ſee him ! bleſs my Eyes / you won't perſwade me out of mySences-- | 
Fknow Mr. Loveday, | 910 HY ten 97 1911 
Wild. hat's more then he does he has forgot himfelf, and Rn 
mag, ſtark ſtaring mad, up to the head and Ears in Love have you 43 
any Cure for a mad Lover? | 2 * 
Peg I vow Mr. Wrldiſh you talk ſtrangelj Jet he looks but odJy--+- 
iE can ferve you Sir, you may command me. | 2] 
loved You are very obliging--- give us the laſt new Song then. 
Peg. J have one to your humor Mr. Wildi Gentlemen, Von! eu 
my bad Voice. * h 
Blunt. Here's to the clearing ont (drin:) now begin. 


'Caſh, and then they broke into their Maſters which was no ſooner known, but 


4 Cure for JEA LOUSIE. 


-$SONG.- 


I. 
APPY wa: 75 ere cheated Sence, 
8 By Loves falſe fires mi 
| From all the ſweets 0 2 
To wilder Paſſion: fled. 
Free from defire be knew no fear 
Emjyment croms'd thtCircling year. 


2 


Since Art and 43 ſdom canr.ot fl ey 
The too ſwiſt footed hours, 
Let ut in Fleaſures melt the day. 
While yer we call it ours. 
He only truly knows to live | 
Y Who arinks, and ſcorns to Love or grieve., 


rid. This is to my Humour indeed. | 
Loved. Now Gentlemen I muſt leave you, this ſpeaks my thanks for your 


Son 
2 Where ſhall we meet anon 7 g 
Loved. Truſt Chance for that (Ex. Loved) 
D Peg what has he given thee? | 
Peg. Anoth r ſ:ch woulu redeem my Velvet Scarf ' 
wild The Jade binters my Poverty---1 have but Three and Six Pence in the 
World, and ſhe has the Conſcience ta ask me for a Crown, "J 
Call. Come Child {er down--- Prithee what. ſhife- did'fl make. to live this . 
Campaign time, when Trade was dcad ?. 
Wild. She was laid up I ſuppoſe to he re itted, for the next Seaſon. 
Peg, Out upon you Mr. Wildiſh, I ſwear-you are. a Scandal to anf Civil 
Womans Converſ:tion 
Wild. A Civil Woman indeed. ( drolling ) 
. Don't mind him--- who were your chief Viſitant ? RIS 
Peg. All things conſidered, I had no great reaſon to complain Colonel 
Viſitants IL had ofall forts, more than I deſir d- im ſure ; my chief Friends were 
Merchants App entictu the kindeſt Creatur est Poor Rogues / they came con- 
ſtantly every Sunday, ſo ſleek and their Bobs ſo Powder 45 and * with ſuch 
an Appetite, as it they had faſteo all the Week before. | 
Wild. Ay mart y, theſe were ſubſtantia Cullyes. | 
Peg.;But ot 1.ſting - the in Exceſſive hounty 1 run em out of their en 


my Sparks where packt away inio che Country, to mi great Mortifcation. 


mut expect tb with rough Seas, and. ſome Storms {therefore he ware of 


_— 4A Cure ſor JEALOUSIE 
Blunt You ſhould have been provident, and laid up for a Caſualty, | 
Peg. We hail have a ſaving Worn indeed Colonel, when Women of Plea- 

{ure come to Hoarding. 

Wild. Had you no Lawyers Clerks? 

Peg. Yes to my ſorrow, 1 was forced to lock up every kind of thing, to my 

very Night Cloaths, for fear of laofing em- there's nothing to be got from 


them — Oaths,and ſcraps of Kocheſter- { muſt leave you b wy Colonel. (Ex. Peg. 17 
Blunt. O' good b wy. Bee 


Wild.] ſhou' d recruit my Caſh, it [knew where. 1 * 
Blant Mont your Uncle disbui ſe? 2 
Wild. Will he cu: bis own Throat--:disburſe! 1 had: 25 goal deſire him to 5 
hold the Door, while [ am in Conference with his Wife. ne 
Flunt He is marryed then? * 


Mila, To an Angel - gad Collontl you might revenge me. | Go. 
Bl: i le think ont at leiſure. 1 am now engag d in an affair which I muft We 
attend, here's two Peices to ſupply your preſent Neceſlity-- Adieu-- (Exit. _— 
wild. So, now I am ſet up again---this is a piece of wondrous Generolity 2 
to lend a man Money upon ſo flender Acquaintance, there muſt be ſomething 


mare then ordinary in this which I can't dive into. But I have the Money, no | 
matter how. R 


On this alone the Joys of Lite depend, Y * 
Ihis wins the Aline, and this G ain, the Friend. $ 
SCENE, Sir John Thrivewells  7oaſe. . 
Enter Bell, Arabella, Betty : % 
Bell, M eil Siſter, what Incouragement d*give me towards Wedlock ? you ; | 


have been marryed long enough now, to know all its Goods, and Ills. 
Arab. Three Months have 1 been Buryed alive. 
Bell. You wonddiſhearten à young Venturer--yoa ſpeak very terribly of your 
Condition -I chought Marryed folkes were meer deeoys,-willtag to draw e- 
very body into E ſnare rather then want Company Now can't I frame ſuch 
dreadful Apprehenſions of it for my life, prithee dal ſhew me my danger 
that I may be ſure to avoid it. 

Arab. The Danger is in the choice, if Intereſt or Paſſ on don t biaſs your 
Judgment, tis The beſt thing'you can do. Marriage is a long Voyage, and you 


an nd —— be zen Veſſcl, for it you ſpring a Leak, tchecwhole Cargois loſt. 

Bell 2120 by Cotes exea, cis beſt keeping where Fam: 

34 you. * whoſe Retifarith is Fill free to look abroad 188 
| pleaſe is — lM Worfds-wfde- you H pick where vou like. -m cotifin'd 
to all the ves and eee dovin'd to "uncomfortable da ys, and 
1* 975 el vönth SHU Ut Have” tran” od mum ern langulm in 

5 Es 9 aan TAR Hot toedfapliin.c "> 7 '3 54s 100 
ao Wis GAPESIEANS) e 203 £01 1696 105 > > 1 cr LigB gy: 


— 


/i il th i 1 


a | | "LOU TPP 
Arab, Add to all, that l am bart d from Converſation, all that might make 


Life ſuppot table, then judge what 1 :ufter. 


Bell. Enough of the bad · if there be any good to be ſaid of it, let's hear that. 

Arab. When Love makes the Union, when equal years, ſuitable Tempers, 
and mutual Affections joyne in the Contort, --- Marriage is all Harmony the 
faithful Husband then centers all his wiſhes in your Arms, and there enjoy- 
ing all his deſires, in your ſatisfaction finds his own. 8 

Zell. Of what Country growth are theſe Men Siſter, not Engiiſh Pm afraid. 

Arab. No doubt there ate ſuch, tho' they are ſcarce, what think you of 

Bell. I don't think of him ax all. 

Arab. Then you are to blame, he thinks of nothing but youT*me ſure. 

Zell. Don't be too poſũtive--he has vow*d it perkaps--Men will do it the 
moment they deceive you, and brag of it aftor--Marriage I find is a meer 
tricking Lotter y, a Thouſand Blanks to every Prize; if ever I am ſuch a mad 
Fool as to venture my Fortune in it, I hope my Lot wont be under I hree-- 
ſcore, for all the Bug bears you ſet up to Fright me. 

Arab. You wont make your ſelf fo wretched. 7 

Bell Piſh, therꝰs convenience in't, the older be is, the ſooner he“ dye, 
and leave me a Rich Widdow --his Age is eaſily ſupplyed abroad, if Conſci- 
ence benꝰt very nice indeed. 

Arab. Yonr ofd Hunks wont be Jealous. (jcering) 

Beli Nor Debauch'd - It I muſt have a Nauſeous Filthy Fellow in Bed 
with me, I had rather he ſhou'd be a Snoring Dotard, then a Drunken Rake. 
All men you fee have their Faults, but old men feweſt; 

Arab. All young Fellows are nt bad. 

Beli, Molt axe · : the hazard is great, the return but little, They are wiſeſt 
who keep their Stocks in their own hands. 

Arab. This wonftbs your mind always--- What think you Berry ?- . 

Ber. | believe the Gentleman that Ogled your Ladyſhip at Church, uld 
foon change Mrs. Bellindas mind. — 

Bell. Ha, ha, a Gallant! I don't blame you. | 

Arab. I don't know. what the Wench means---d* you think when Im at 
Prayers I mind any thing. cle. | | 

Zet. Your Ladyſhip couẽd nft chuſe but ſee him, for his Eyes were never 
off you all Prayer time. : x 

Bell. There muſt be ſomething in this by your Bluſning. 

8 Arab. Do 1: Bluſh ? : Tis. 7 e : | 
Bell. Never pretend to hide it, yon do it ſo awkardly (tis the more ſeen 


* en Mr. Sparbiſn is below--Will your Ladyſhip pleaſe to be at 
me 214 644 | 3 

Bell. Yes, We ſhall haye good ſport with this Fop,. you muſt expect his- 
Adi reſſes--he makes Love to eviry new Face, and js ſo great an Ad mirer et 
himielf, he thinks every body elſe ſo. | 15 Arabs. 


We jor | ' I ; 


: 44 You are his moſt perticular Adoration. | 
Bell. Les, I thank him, le does plague me, but in ſo ids manner, 
1 believe eee the only Paſſion he can reiſe in any Woman.” 


Emer Spar kim. 
Spark, Ladies your molt Obedient Slave---Ah Madam, I hanꝰt feen you 
theſe ſeven years. (40 Bell.) 


Bell. Tis ſcarce ſo many days fince you were here. 
Spark. To a Wiſhing Lover, every day's a Year. 

Arab. If abſence be ſuch an afflition, Sir, methigks you ſhou'd not 1555 
. puniſh*c your ſelf ſo ſeverely, 

Spark. A Charming Creature (ſide. ) Ile tell your Ladyſhip the reaſon, 1 
ha end in Company the laſt week with Jack Milaiſp, and ſome other honeſt 
Fellbws, where 1 was obliz'd to ſwallow a vaſt Quantity of filthy Clarret, 
whick caus'd ſuch an Eruption of Pimples in my Face, that I have been con- 
- ftraind to keep my Chamber, and Phy ſick for em ever knce=- this ts my firſt 
Sally I aſſure j ur Ladyſhip. 

Bel: Fye Mr. Sparksfh keep your Chamber for a few Pimples. 

Spark, *Ged Madam, I wouf'd aſſoon app*ar upon the Stage in a full Houſe 
with dirty Linnen, as be fren in Publick with a Pimple en my Face. 

Arab. A Patch hides it Sir, and that's no uncommon fight in a Beau. 

Spark. Vom Ladyſhip does n*t take me for a Beau. 

Arab, For a moſt Accompliſh'd Gentleman, and that I think is the true 
meaning of the word. 

Spark, She's in Love with me already (afide.) Your Ladyſhips moſt Hum- 
ble Servant-- a Beau is the moſt redicvlous Creature in the Univerſe, as the 
Raſfcally foets repreſent him on the Stage, by the World, I bid rather be a 
Dromedary, then one of their Eeau's. 

2 "ag ſome of them are hit pretty well-- what think you of the Lord Fop- 
ton 

Spar. An Original .t-But don't th ink him to be fonndin the Creation, of 
the Stage, 
| urs, dave ſeen ſomething very near him, 


Spark. Prey Madam where ? May I be curſt, if I wou'd a't go half a Mile on 
foot to ſee ſuch a Monſter, 
Bell. I won'c ipeak pla iner for fear the Fool ſhou'd unde: ſtand me you have 
a pretty Suit on Vir. Sparksſb. 
Spark, *Tis New Madam--my own Invention--1 hate to follow in 2 Faſhi- 
on- I wou*'d as ſoon Dine after another, as dreſs atter him. 
Arab. Vou are the Original of all Gallantry. 
Spark. Poor Creature, ſhe's damnably Smitten, if 1 ſhou'd ſpeak but one 
Void in her praiſe now, ſhe cou d net reſiſt me (aſide. ) Your Ladyſhip-val- 


lues me at too high a rate but you ind-ed are all Perfection- your Eyes Kil- 


ling -yeur Mein Charming, _m Air FO Arg 'Drels an 
| rd 0 DIG « 2 - 


- 90 ell dodge 1 24 1 


e 


"A Cure for PEALOUSTE. "EP 
* Hold, held, w what pity, cis all theſe fine things ſhould be thrown 


away upon a Wife - Ian Married Sir. 

Spark. Now. is. ſhe rin herſelf Unmarried for my ſake (aſide) Married ! 
Who is the hap y owner o f ſo prodigious a Trezſure---Ged judge me, had ! 
the Univerſe — all its Glories at my diſpoſal, 1 wou d give them all to be 
ſo bleſt one Night; 'tis happinels N for an Age to touch this lovely 


hand. ; 
Euter Sir Jonn with 4 Letter, Scrap. and Pimpw. 


Sir Tobn, Why, how now Mr. Sparkiſh, you Invade this Gentlemans right. 


Scrap. Ha, the Devil my Wife! Is this her going to Prayers ! find my 
Sufpitions are juſt ——Odsbus | can hold no longer — how now Mrs. do * 
go to Church here? 


Ara Pray'rs are newly over Gr. 1 35 
Scrap, So it ſeem l ended ?emgpon*r then you deſi gn'd I believe. 


Spare 1 hope yo1 are nt Jealous Sir=l was only repeating an-Amorous 


Peg out of a new Plav. 
. You did t much to the Life Sir—but pray no rehearſing with my 
Wife ge nome Miitrels. (to Arab) 
Betiy Now will y: ur L-dyſhipr believe my Maſter is jealous 
Are, 1 don't know what to.b-lieve——come. Siſter hall! have your Com- 


ny. 
Pimp. This is my Miſters 12 Lady, and chats $ — Hushand, I m 
dog her. (Ex. Arab Bell Betty. Pimp) 


Spark, Ladyes, ſhail I hace th. Honour to wait on you? Sir Jobs, r 
very hu nble Ser vant— Sir, Is 7. yours, 

Scrap. -- And my Wife vom * he going alte her. bir, sir a 
Wore with you. | 


Spark. Me Sir. 
Scr. Pray how long have you. Chet acquainted wh that Lady! N. 


Spark, Your humble Servant Sir—auGther time—pray excule me, 1 muſt 


wait upon the Ladyes, ds vic: 6 a8-2k> 


Scrap.. Oh Torment l before my Fate ! cis not coibe end 0 l 1 

Sir John. Stay Son I hays tomerhing to fay to PRI + Rave r his, 
lon, reads.) 57 C5 0 
Well I muſt bear itt. (ſid e.). 

85 John, Oh Wiretched Son of an Inhumane Father, teme is owing thy 

ely end; my ce uel Nature fort thee out to Ruine, he's dead, the Staff 

of my old Age i is s and ore to Enhance whe + mighty 2 Pen 

me he Dy d, Aer an fil | + * N 


Ser. Any in news in your Letter Sir John 4 oi UA + 

dir John My Soxnalas J my deareſt Childꝰs no more. {4 25 > 4 

Scrap. | thought ou had been ſacisſred of that long 280. 7 65 * * 

Sir Jobs, Never Ul nov. 1. 0:46 yo eee 
Fame in uncertain rumor oke his kek; 04 hir 8 ** n 

EI + D 4 Vet 


* 


„ 

- KI 
. 
N 


18, 4 Cure for JEALOUSIE. 
Yet ftilt I hop'd, but Oh that hope was vain ! 
For ſee the fatal Iruths confirmd. . 


Scrap. If he be dead your Grief won't recal him, I thought you had been a --þ 
man ot more Virtue, then ſo immaderately to bewail an extravagant Son, by ; £ 


my tioth if it where my Caſe I ſhould be thankful for it. 
Emer Pimpwell, 


Pimp So, have lodg d her, what may theſe Showers portend,no harm I bog: 


Sir John How can I grieveenough for ſuch a loſs, an only fon, and 1 my 
the Canſe * 


Scrap. You the Cauſe ! -- how can that be? i b 

Sir Jen. checkt his youth with too ſevere a hand, | 
Held hard the Reins, and ſcorning gentler 
Methods, with harſh r proaches tired his Gen'rous 
Spirit. Oh had 1 Jur'd him on to Vertues Practiſe, —_ 
By milder Counce's, and frank Confidence, £3 
Nad not ] ſhat, the open hand of Bounty. 

He ſtill had lived, and Ibeen happy. 

Pimp. So, ſo, This is as it ſhould be (aſide) 

Sir John. Too late I ſee the Dangerous Rocks and ſhelves, 
On which Young men by Parents ſtrictneſs dacht | 
For ever Periſh----- . 

With fooliſh care the Torrent we o 

And damm the Flood, which rageing for its paſſage, | 

- Ore flows its B inks, and drowns our future quiet; | 6 
Elſe woud it keep its Bounds, and calmly flow, 

Till in Lifes Ocean it had loſt its name. | 

Scrap. Greif has turn'd your Brain Sir -- this is rank Hereſy Sir John wouts 
you have Parents encourage lewdneſs, or d' you think all have their time for 
Debauchery ? Z 

Sir John. Give it a Gentler Name. 1 
Sorap. If fo, tis in vain to ſuppreſs the growth of Vice and preach up early 
Vertne---We had as good let our Children take their Swing, and wait patiently, 
when they pleaſe to reform. 1 

Sir Job». Let al Parents take warning by me- be my Mis fortune to them. © 
a Sea mark to ſhun thoſe ſ+nd; where ſo many have already been wreckt- vou 1 | 
eſpecially. ir. vou have a Nephew, whoſe dri k humor and gaiety much reſembles © 
that of my unfortunate Son ſt int him not, give him in reaſon what he asks, 3 
keaſt his wild Court's, plunge him in thoſe miſcheifs, I have ſo much cauſe to- | 
hment. | | | 

Pimp. ] am like to ſtay long enough for an Anſwer (afidey «- 

Scrap-Vle ſee him bang d firſt ( afide) why Sir Job» would you have me ruin 
his Soul, nd my own Eſtate? Shou'd | give what he'd ask, he wou'd beggar 
me in one cek, and ride Poſt to the Devil himſelſe the next 5 


8 * o * 
1 1 — * 
N a 1 
4 W „ 


Sir John 


 ACwefor FTEALO USIE. | 


Sir John. Pardon me Honeſt Friend, Grief made me forget thee, 
The News you have prought me is very unwelcome, 
This with my thanks, may make thze ſome Amends 
For thy long ſtay--(gives him money ) tell your Maſter 
wou d feign ſee him here, to learn from his own 
Mouth, all the Circumſtances of this diſmal ſtory. 
Pimp. | will Sir (Ex.) 
Sir John. Curſe on my lib :ral hand. 
Now tis too late l'm prodigal of Wealth 
The Miſer thus, when the Grim Tyrant Death 
(ready to puſh him headlong to the Grave) 
Stares in his face; but for one hours repreive, 
Would give the ſordid Gains of his whole Life. 
What | defign'd my Son, ſhall go to charitable 
-* Uſes, that if poſlible)1 may attone for my 
Barbarous uſage to him | 
SGͤcrap. afide) I was in hopes of getting ſomthing by his Liberallity, | 
* Sir John. To you Son Scrapall will I give a Thouſand Pounds, as an Addition 
to my Daughters Fortuae. | 
* Scrap. Sir John I return you a Thouſand thanks. 
"> Sir. Job», But withthis proviſoe, that you give your Nephew a better Al- 
; towance then formerly. - 


b * No w from the Day to Darkneſs 1'le retire 
Mat Nor any thought of human kind admit, 
% But the dear Memory of my much lov'd Son. 
6 For himinconſtant Grief my hours 1'le ſpend, - 
| 5 Till wich my wretched liſe my Sorrows end. (Exrunt. 
"nt 


The End of the Sccond Act 


H-_- —_—— 
—_ 4 


x 4 ACT III. Sczux, Blunts L odgings. 


Blunt Solus. 


x 
1 Blum. ID everl think it would come to this, muſt I de one of Loves 
A &./# motly Fools? I had ill luck to looſe her ſo—ſhe vanlſht in a Miſt 


X —Gad I'm afraid ſhe's gone to Heavn — but if ſhe be upon Earth Vle 
find her (Exer Pimp: ) , What's the News with you? 
Hi | am top full Sir, I ſhall run over preſently. © 3 
Bl : 1 am all impatience to know my fate. | 
Pzmp. I was alway a dextrous Perſon 5 manageing theſe affairs. 

2 


* 


20 4 Cure fo FEALOUSIE 


Bl, Spare your own praiſes,and let me know the ſucceſs of your Negotiation. 

Pimp. I went Sir — 1 

Blu. Be breif— what effects had my Letter "NE | 3 

Pimp. Your Father had no ſooner read it, but he broke ont fato the moſt 2 
Violent Expreſſions love aud greif cou*d find his Exclam tions were ſe- 9 
conded with ſach a floud of tears, aud Groans. ſo loud, as won d awaken'd <3 
pity in any Breaſt, | A 

Bl : lis as I could wiſh. 8 

Pimp, LWas afraid I ſhou'd never have en: Anſwer, but indeed When the od. 
Gentleman oke, twas to the pur poſe. by 

B/: What ſaid he? | 

Pimp. This, and this, all theſe Sir (ſhews money) 

Bl : Oh unexpected Happineis !—he not only laments my Death, but has 
laid by kis niggardly Temper 

Pimp. He deſires ro fee you Sir at his Houſe, 

Bl : Fle go this Minute, and diſcover —— 

Pimp, You wont ſtay and hear the reſt. 

pk Yes, yes, out withst — 

Pimp. I ſaw. — who do you think I ſaw Sir, 

Bl : The Devi! — 

Pimp. Well gueſt, — I ſaw that game pretty Charming 9 maple: 
vou to Church to day. againſt your Inciination. N 

Bl: Ha !' where, prithee . | 1 

On At Sir Jovns. | its ul 2 


Nay, then | fly (going 7) ' 171 8 
Fing, Hold, Sir Ho d, the : gonefiom thence-- 1 followed her to her own WY 
Houſe, which is the very next Obr. | 2 
Bl - 'Slife, 1 114ifh his Ut cles (fide) 
Pimp, i had ot time to make any great diſcovery---This I know, ſhe is 


Marryed, her Husband old and I believe Jcalous--- farther enquiry may 
be made 'r, 


B: About it inſtantly deer honeſt Pimpnell. | 1 
Pimp Now it is dear honeſt Pin pwell, before t was Son of Whore, and a Lick e 


(-fide ) Vie doit Sir, Ile creep into the family Secrets I warrant you but I ſhal! 
want a little money to blind the Spyes Sir. & 
BI: There tis for you---make haſt (gives him money) 9 
Pimp; Never fear >ir-- truſt ny manage ment- don't 1 1 cell yon l'le do it. © 
Bl: Sdeath l'm upon the Rock, and thou tor tur'ſt me with impertinence 8 
Tins Say no more Si- but truſt. me le do it (Ex.) 
Thus far Fortune ſmiles--the way to bepp wet loaks ſmootb, and all 
at is clear, and ſerene-- m Fate is 'now in my own hands and ] may be re- 
ceived into Grace, when ever | pleaſe to be known, — [wiſh] don't blunder 
in my Story, if [trip | am difcover'd before | would be, - this tis to be In love 
l can think of nothing but this glorious App rition- Duty muſt, WAIT a 

while--tili I hæar more of her, I ſhall chuſe to be as I am wh 
er 


"It. 


bas « xs 


A Cure for * 


Euter Wildiſh. 


Wild How now Colonel, have you vour muſing Fits too, in my Conſcience 
all the young Fellows in Town are running mad, this Love grows Epidemical 

Bl: Who is in love Wildiſh ? | 

Wild. The Symptoms are very ſtrong upon you --but Ned Loveday is quite 
gone - there's a Fellow now, was as god ompanion as liv'd till thi: damn%d 
Frenzy ſeiz'd -him-- But now he mall fit in Coq pany, as thoughtful as a 
Coffee-Honſe Politician over a thumb e News Paper, | 

B“: Who has ſpoil'd him thus Jack? 

Wild. Bellinda, Daughter to Sir John Thrivewell: 

PI: Is ſhe hand ſome? | | | 

Wild. Ask Loveday, he*l tell you wonders---/ am no Judge, for Pm no 
Lover. : 19 7771 . b , 

Bl : Therefore the beſt —a Lover is no more a Judge of his Miſtreſs Beau- 
ty, then ſhe he ſeif, but is as falie a Mirrour as her own Looking Glafs. 

Y1 41d. Oh Sir,B-auty and Painting require Skill inthe Judge —— the Igno- 
rant may be deceived- and as there are certain charms in curious Pictures only 
known to Maſters, ſo thete may be ſomething in a Ladyes face only viſible to 
her Lover. 

Bl: I don't take Lovers to be ſo quick Sizhted—1 rather look upon them 
as Blind Votaryes who are always molt Zealous in thoſe matters of which they 
are moſt ig norant: But to divert this dull diſcourfe—how are Affairs man- 
aged at the Payhouſe? who are the moſt Celebrated Wits? Tis almoſt 7 vears - 
ſince [ enjoy d that beloved di vet ſioi no ſmall Addition to my Sorrew for 
being ſo long beyond Sea. 

Mild. T heres as g:eat an alteration as in any Government I know; Wit and 
good fence have been lang banifht thence, and in their ſtead Farce, Song, and 
Dance have got the Soveratgn Sway. Farce writers and Songſters are now the 
moſt fam'd for W it, and Jack Pudding; for Atting. A Capering Mor ſit ur ſhall 
get more in a Month then a good Player can in a Year. 

Bl: Then ' cis not worth ones while to got) the Playbon ſe. 

Wild- Yes to fave money. i 

Bl: Save moaey / | f | 

Wild. Ile prove it the cheapeſt Houſe in Town—You fit there three hours 
for half a rom, and ii that time at the Tavern twould coſt you three, at 
my Lade, Baſſet Table as many Guineas, and at the Groom Porters more 
Hundreds. | 

B/: I always thought the Playhouſe, was in order for the Tavern- 

Wild. T here's Variety, the only thing can make Life reliſh, 

Are you for the Play to Night? @ | 

Bl: I amelſewhere ingaged. | Fs | 

Wild. With ſome Strumpet Ple lay my Life——P?ox on them, I begin to ab- 
har them, they but ſpoil good Company. 

— WL x 


we 70 AT. 30 


H am going to viſit Sir Fobn Thrivewel. 

Wild. His Greif is ſo great for the loſs of his Son, which has been newly 
Confirm*d, that he admits no Company. : 
BI: Mine is upon his own Invitation, — I brought him that Confirmation. 
Mild. Were you acquainted wich Frank? 

El: Intimat-ly. 
Wild. Poor Frank. Faith I pity him with all my heart he was a good Na- 
tured jolly fellow, — he and l have made many a nig ht of it, — But we are 
all Mortal. | | 
BI: Ha, ha, ha, ray when had you ſo ſerious a tliought of Mortallity before? 
Wild, Not a great while —— nor [ don't defiga to think on't more, Death 
will come too ſoon, whether we think or no, to be always meditating on our 
Graves, is the ſure way to hring us to em; tis inverting the order of na- 
tzure, and beginning at the wrong end of the Courſe; a Charnel Houſe in my o- 
_ pinion is no {uch pleaſant Proſpect, ——hang all forts of thinking, it damps 

Mirth, brings hollow Eyes, and wrinkl d Cheeks. What think you of a Song 
to the purpole. | 

BI: With all my Heart. | | 
Wild. But l tell you beforehand what you are to expect, 

The Tune, and Words are both my own Compoſition, 
Bt: No Atologyet, I befeech you Sir. 


S O N G. — «If 


1 
T ET the Politick Sor N 
HS Againſt Monarchy plot, 
And dye a bold Martyr to faction ; 
He who takes o, his Glaſs 


Ill ner%e be ſuch an Aſs, 
A toftudy a Nations diftrattion, 


"1 7. 
Tu the Sober and wiſe 
Who conſult and deviſe 
Flow to tumble all into Confuſion; 
But no changes of State 
Pex the Good Fellows Pate 
Nor thoughts of his own Diſſolution. 


. 
Lets Drin while we have it 
Tis Nonſence to ſave it 
Ner*e think who ſhall pay at the Ferry; 
I Charon ( ſ«ch fate i. 
Punt waft us Ore Gratis 


vel ftay en this ſule and be Merry. Bhs” 


1 0 
"A | 


- 

& 

"7 
< — 
5. 


4 Cure for I EALOU SIE. 23 


8. Thon1art a profeſt-Libertine, Wildiſh. 
Vila. I muſt confeſs I love to live while I may, and take my Share in the 


; tranſitory Comforts of this Uncertain World, You won't to the Play you ſay, 


- 
80 


3 


-—] will ev n go home, put on the Conntenance of Sobriety, and endeavour 
to ſqueez a ſmall Sum ont of my Uncle.--- Collonel your Servant, ( Ex. 

Plant. Yours- - Tis a mad Spar k --I dowt wonder he ſhou'd rt know me, 
for he knows no body long- - but that a few Years ſhould blot me out of the 


* remembrance of all my friends, is wondrous ſtrange ! I ſuppoſe they reckon © 
ma a Fellow of no ordinary aſſurance for being fo ſoon acquainted among 


them---Time will clear all doubts 
Three different / aſſiuus now divide my Soul, 
And in their turn, 1t*s every power controul 
Love, hope, and fear, claim each an equal ſway, 
Vu hile I, to each a Slave, muſt ali obey, (Ex.} 


SCENE, Scrapalls Heuſe. 
Emer Arabella and Olinda. 
Ar. 1 am glad I know the cauſe of his Diſtemper-»-does Jealouſy make his 


No dle ake ? from this hour t'te be free, I have been too long a Slave to his 


Jealons humour--he ſhan*t think to me me up here---1 declare for Liberty, 


andi a free ſtate, and will in ſpight of his Tvranny, viſit the Park, and Play» 


Houſe; and take all other Innocent Diverſions the Town affords as well as o 


thers of my Age and Condition. 


= 
ww 
: 
l 4 
„ * 
_— 
* 
= 


0 Bleſs me! here's my Father, he has heard all. 


Euler Scrap, 


Serap. I am glad I know your Reſolutions Mrs but you fhialt neither vifit 
Park, nor Pla / houſe, nor take any of thoſe Innocent Diverſions, (as you call 


em) Nay, you ſhant go no-more to your beloved Prayers. Ile prevent your 


> gadding fo the future, Ile have my Doors Lockt vp imediatley-- you ſhantſtir 


a Foot without my knowledge come, come, I begin to ſee through your De- 


© vortions- -tis all pretence - nd ſhew, yon would feign be thought very Gedly. 


for ſooth, but { ſhrewdly ſulpeCt your Practiſes are not very Orthodox. 
Arab. Pray Hwba-d, will you explain your ſelf. 


Scrap. No, no, Wife you want explaining, had you not better deal openly 


And f irly wich me---if | am too old for your purpoſe, if you muſt go to the 


iq, and to the Park, and to my Lady Title T artles, and Mrs. Fiddle Faddies to 


237 pick upyoung Fellows, wh; can't you apply your ſelf directiy to me, and tell 
me tte cownright truth of the matter, | 


o For all my Fathers Lecture, I'm reſolved my Husband ſhall never be my 
Confide:rt in my Amours (4 | 


fide) _ . 
Scrap. This had been ſomething, here was fair warning, and I knew what 


24 A Care for J EAL OU SIE. 


to truſt to. Rut to deceive me, and the World with your borrowed Sancti. 
ty, is not fo well, *tis not indeed Aas 1 am an honeſt Man ſhe doe; not ſo 


much as bluſh ſot it. 


Ol Here's a Storm tos ard, bl ern make off to weiter. (aſide, Ex, Olind. 
you ought to be aſham'd for your felf, to 


Are Let the guilty bluſh 
asperſe Innocence, and render Age which ſhould b: reverenced, delpicable--- 
this jealouſy is more ſcandalons then your Avarice, jg 

Scrap. My Age, and my Avarice, ſo, ſo, 

Hab. M bat cin you charge me with ? what Intreague have Le ever ingag'd 
What Amours have 1 incouraged? 

Scrap. Oh Impudence ! did not theſe Eyes fee — 

Arab. What d d they ſce ?--your Jealouly ſees couble.—1 challenge the 
whole world to caſt the leaſt blemiſh upon my unſullyed Reputation; 3 you 
jaw a Fellow kils my hand, a monſtrou Crime, was it not? I gave it him to 
divert my ſelſe, asl would my Fan, or Glove, to a Jugier that I might ſee his 
Tricks I don't ſpeak this to ex uſe my ielt ——*cis not worth my while, 

Scrap. Oh prodigious ! ſhe gloryes in her wickednels |! 

Arab. Nay ſince you have provoked me to this degree Te fre: ly ſpeak 
my min, was it for this my blooming Youth was laciih d to thy old with- 
ered Arms ? 

Scrap, Ay, ay, tis ſ{o — I am that ſort of a thing, that implement , belong- 
ing to ont La yſhip called a Cucks/d, hum! Pray go on with your tory. 

Ar: Was it for this I was contented to want ali thoſe Pleaſn:es which ſuit 


in 


my years, ard confined my felf to this Wilderneſs of a Houſz —- Love in- 
deed va the pretepce, *twas Love and diſſ-mbled kindueis kepr'r me from the 


We 64. — pr 1y Dear don t lcave me here alone, hu meſs won't permu me to 
bear thee Comp ny, and I can never jive without thee. 

Scrap. Have yon done yet 

Arab No. Tle ne're have done, --your Coverauſheſs, and Griping, 1 bore 
with patience, but your ſuſpicions, are not to be endui ed, -expect it vonſter, 
——| will be reveng'd, 1 ſhant lys tamcly yon, and cry over. ms wrongs. 
but ſummon all thar?*s Maiculine in my Sou to aid me, Dan't think I mean to 
rizht my ſelf by injuring my Virtue, that wou% be arevenge too mean and 
difhonourable. 
Scerap. Odsbud, I did not think ſhe had ſuch a Spirit —ſhe' certainly 

m rther me l muſt ſeeminly make friends i-r my own ſake (, And 

do you think I was in ear neſt Duck — 1 did but try yon — I never was 
jealous in my lite, not I, indecd Dear I was not, g where you will —— = aud 
do what you will, but dons be engry. 

Arab. Have not I juſt cauſe ? 

Scrap. You ſan't frown, indeed you fan*r--you ſhall have no more cauſe Duck 
hat l was but in jeſt. 

Arab. fis a dangerous way of jcſting---n-xt time you are diſpoled to be 
merry, you would do well to find another Subject. 

ran Well, well, wont no more - Iwou't truly - but fall us de Friends 
chen? ce me let's kiſs and friends. Arab. 


 ACure for JEALOUSIE be 
Arab. I am ſoon pacify'd -nowam 1 drawing a Nanfcos Kid e my 


_ ſelf. (aſide) 


Scra wy, I fant think you truly reconciled till you kiſs me. 
There (ki/-) Fogh ! this would make one forſwear kiſſing ( aſide) * 


Won mm jeſt any more | hope? 


Scrap. Nor you be angry--- | 
Arab, Not unleſs you are Jcalous in jeſt. n HF. un; 
— What if 1am in earneſt? 4 
Arab. Keep it to your ſelt. -ſol am not nens wich it, 1 ſhall be welt 
enough ſatisfied. 
Serap. A Bargain, 7 


Arab. Adieu Nusband- I am $2 oing dt to ſee a friend--nav no * as 
you wou'd preſervethe peac® had I ſuhmitted patiently to the YoaſR, 1 What 4 


blelled time ſhou'd I have had all myTifetong? - 


She that owns a higher Por herſelf befools 
7 * buffing yo the jealous Fluuband rules, (Ex. * 


Scrap. Alli is not right yet-1 doubt ſhe hears Malice in her Hedrgl-s Thieſe 
Women are Devils when provok'd-Odsbud, I con'd not have beleid d it was in 
her, - Lal way took her to be as mild as a Lamb, hut I find her more fariows 
then a Tyger he has bloody thoughts, th it's certain.---She told me ſhe 
wou'd not fo meanly revenge her ſelf as to Cuckold me, no I thank her,-that * 
ſh: has done already--and now would cut my Throat for ſuſpecting ber--I'muſt 
conſult Dajn- (Enter Daſh) Oh Thoma, thou your rad moſt I 
ſtand in great need of thy ad vicſee. 


Daſh. hat ſtranze Altetations are theſe?, your tooks ſeem Ghafily, and i 


diſordered Sir -has any thing frighted you? 


Scrap Weilthey may Daſh,--well they may, x oi in a peril bs = life, my 
precious Spouſe has a deſign to murder me. 
Daſh. How Sir, Impoflible'! - 1 1 2 


Scrap. Ah ſuch Language ſuch bloody Threats — vhould n make thy hair 
ſtand bolt vpright to hear em. 


* Daſs. incredible! 2 


Sc, This is nothing Man--if thou had?ſt but ſeen how in that — I did, 
with what a Malicious fiery countenance ſhe f. poke twould have terrify*d the 


indeed --eſtu&ion was in her Eyes, and flames in her Noſtrills.-look look, 


Death is come for me- doſt thou not ſac where the Grim Ugly Monſter ſands, 


-Ahakingpthis Iron Mace at me | OA e 


aA\L og 87 188 10 


Daſby There“ nothing Sir is all ae ling þ bor 


Scrap: Hark what Voice was thar--ſomething cryed have a Care N dondt 
R Angel's com: to wern me of my approaching danger 
Dau. hy ate falt e oueh far doing any body good (ide) 
Scrap. Are not theie thing Ominon Daf I Thatl never flop more ll 
"this Viper that preys upon my reſthe erumt 9 bn cnn od Dom 
Daſh, Can Foeany, way Serviceableto'you Sir ?al einn 17 A. 
| 1 


% Ys | ' SEr 4p. 


26 "A Cure for JEALOUSIE. 
Serap. I have been a very good Maſter to thee Thomas. 
Daſh. | cant deny it Sir. 

Scrap. Wound it not trouble thee to loſe me? 

Daſb. | hope there is no danger of it Sir, --- whither does this tend? (afide 

Serap. If thou wouldſt but do one thing for me Thomas, thou ſhah neyer 
want while I live. 

Daft. You may command me Sir. 

Scrap, Shut the Deor, we muſt be very Secret in't I have told thee in 
what perpetual fear | live, and what danger my Life will be in, while this 
Malicious Woman is in the Houſe with me --- now thou may*ft do a Chari- 
table Deed, and rid me of her. 

aſh. That lyes in your own power Sir---Sue out a Divorce. 

Ser. But Thomas, that will be very chargable#aad after all there muſt be a 
ſeperate Maintenance, at leaſt 200!. per Am, a very great ſum of Money--befides 
Sir Job! has promited me a Thouſand Pound more. that won'd be loſt, ſhoud 
ue proceed to an open Rupture——Methinksit wou'd be more diſcreet to put 
her out of all poſſibility of doing me an Injury ——what doſt thou think ? 

Daſh. If I underſtand you Sir, you wou'd have her murther'd. 

Scrap. Thou haſt hit it, twould be very kiad in thee to do this for thy 

Maſter, a meer Act of Charity. | 
Da. A very barbarous one I don't like the Employment. 
© Scrap. Don't be ſo loud good T homas. 

Daſb. This old mans Villany is beyond Faith. (aſide) 

' - Scrap. Lookee Thomas, there's a perfect Neceflity for the doing it, and that 

quite takes away the Barbarity--ſelf preſervation is natures moſt Fundamental 

'Law--we are obliz?d by our veiy being to protect it—Snppoſe thou wert aſ 

faulted on the Highway, would'ſt thou not defend thy elf, nay kill the 

Aſſailant, rather then looſe thy own life? 

* Daſb. No doubt I ſhou'd Sir. | 

Scr. My Caſe is worſe--here is private treachery intended, I ſhou%d be 
a ſelf Murtherer, if I did not keep the Knife from my Throat. 

- Daſh, Tis a heinous Sin Sir. | 

Scrap. Humph /-»hy that's true---yot hang it Thamas, We know what we 
are, and where we are now but who can teil what wilbecome of us 

hereafter? - 

Dab, A meer Abeiſt,--one may gueſs where you'l go hereafter. (aſide) It 


would be Murther in me Sir, the“ nee ſo excuſable in you. 


Scrap. Prithee Daſh think a little beiter on*t,--1 always took thee for my 
friend, and ſure a friend will venture as far for che preſervation of his friends 
life as his own. 

Daſh, Vie ſeem to comply with him, there may be ſomething made on't. 


2 
Scrap, Come, Come, Thomas here's money for thee--what honeſt 1dr 
muſt be incouraged---prithee conſider on t a little. 
Daſh. Why truly Sir, It do's not ſeem ſo criminal as at firſt View. 


Sar 4. 


"2 #5 on — 1 — 
15 9 s * © | 1 ͤ—é 
_ "_ 4 p by 8 y — 4 > 
I - . 5 « +. »„ 1 
- - r ** 


— 
- » > 
Pad 
"I ” 


A Cure for JEALOU 81 E. 2 27 


Scrap. I muſt confeſs it had a foul aſpedt--here, here's more money for thee-» 
I warrant thou wilt not think it halfe ſo bad as thou did'ſt. 

Daſr. How bountiful is he for Miſchief / (ſide) Nay Sir I begin to find 
(as you well obſerv'd ) that Neceſſity will palliate the Guilt v it muſt be done for 
the preſervation of your life, more vallued by me then a thouſand ſuch as hers. 

Scrap. Honeſt Daſh--well thou art my beſt Friend--I knew it would ſtartle 


thee at firſt. | 
Dao How wou'd you have it done, by what means, for that's next to be 


conſidered on. | 
Scrap. [leave it wholly to thee, ; 
Dafv. Poiſo I know is the moſt ſilent Death, but mo ſt —— muſt 


be ſo done as may give the World no cauſe to ſuſpect you had any and in ir. 
Now ſhou'd ſhe be poiſon'd, all that hear of your Quarrel will conclude you 


the Guilty Perſon, 
Scrap Right. . * 
Daſh Therefore I think 'twil be beſt killing her abroad. 


Scrap. Softly. ; 
Doſh, Which may be done very conveniently to morrow morning You 
know it is her Cuſtome to walk out very early. Now the time will give us a 


| ” fair Opportunity to diſpatch her without Noiſe. : 


Scrap. Excellent. 

D. b. 1 ſhall want more Money, ir. | 

Scrap. How Daſh! | pr-.feſs thou haſt had ten Shillings already. 

Def. It won't be proper for me to appear in the Buſineſs Sir, I know « 


couple of Fellows will be glad to do it, Men us'd to Bloud, and bred up in 


Sla. ghter, — But a good Reward will be neceſſary to Seal up their Lips. 
Scrap. Never doubt, they Ihe Secret for their own ſakes, yet thou ſhalt 
have more Money, But prithee Thu bargain as hard as thon can ſt 


| 8 (one Knocks,) Bleſs we who's that! 


Daſb. Ile fee—*is your Nephew, Mr. Wildiſh. 
Enter Wildiſh. 


Scrap. Doſt think he did not liſten? 

Daf#. No Sir, I heard him come up Stairs (afide.) © 

Scrap. Your humble Servant good Mr. Wildiſh-you are grown a great Stran · 
ger here, have you any Buſineſs with me Sir? =—(Feeringly. ) 

Wild. I am come Sir 

— Ay--l ſee you are--for what? pray be covered Sir. 

Wild. 1 humbly deſire, | | 

Scrap. I know the ſtile-- tis the old Story, you want Money. 

Wild. tam glad Sir, you are fenſidle of my wants--1 muſt confeſs my pre- 


ent Viln is in hopes you ſupply em. 


Scrap. Your hopes have deceiv*d you, I ſhan't give you a Farthing. - 
Wild. Then 1 muſt Rob Sir. "mn CON? . 


E 2 Ef Scras 


Os "IS Care fr JEALOUSTE 


Ser. Then you may be ;Hang'd Sir---do, with all my heart, Ide come 
and fee you make your Exit Decen tl. 0 5 wn 
; #Kil2. For the Honour of your Family,--- I = 
 ., Scrap... Hearkee Nephew--my Money is Honour, and Family to me- there- 4 
fore I part not with a Croſs· I muſt give the Rogue ſomething, ſpight ofmy 
Reſolves to ſtarve him. Sir Johns Thouſand Pounds is on that Condition (2 4 
fide) Bow much will ſupply your great Neceſſity ? mY 2 
Wild, A Hundred Guinea's wou'd do me a kindneſs for the preſent. 72 
Scrap. A Hundred Guineas f- art mad, or doſt think me ſo? A Hundred % 
Guinea's would do thee a kindneſs for the pteſent, by my troth and ſo they 
will me,--here are Five, take them and bleſs my Liberality. Corte, 
Wild, Theſe indecd are more then I expected (afae.) alas Sir, this wan't 
pay my Semſtreſs--«beſides there's my Taylor, Shoo-maker, my Perruke-ma- 
ker, my Hoſyer, my Perfumer, my--- ] 

Scrap. So, ſo, ſo--what a Pox have you to do with half theſe People.! 
plac't you in the Temple to Study the Law, and your Study is to be a Beau, a N 
Fop, an Als, a Fool, ---owe your Seamſtreſs Five Guineas! How can it be? ; 

Wild, Five Guinea's, will go but a very little way in Linnen, Sir, 

Scrap. Not in your Loggerheaded Steenkirks indeed--what need you wear 
any thing but 'a Band and Cuffs? | | „ 

Wild. My Uncle wou d make a fine prim old faſhion*d Gentleman of me. 1 

Ce, BY 


Scrap. And what occaſion had you to cut off your Hair, a very decent Head 
of Hair, | proteſt almoſt as good as Daſi s. But you muſt be a Beau. = 
mad. This old Fellow as ks ſo many Impertinent Queſtions, I ſha!l deſerve rofl 


my Five Guinea's richly, (aſide.) Sir I had very Scandalcus Hair, not fit for. 4 
2 a Gentleman to be ſeen in | SHES wider 2 
Scrap. Humph ! a Gentleman! ſuppoſe you had cut it off .- pray why cond * * 
Tt you content your. ſelf with a Bob as well as I-—look here's a Wig -- 
how long do you think I have had it A | >” 
W- - - Wild. Ever ſince the Revolntion 1 ſuppoſe (aſide.) perhaps a Year or Two. 
= Scrap, I proteſt | have worn it theſe Five. Years--and tis not very Con- 
x . temptible yet. | 
Wild. "Twill be as good Fifty Years hence Ile engage. (aſide. 
Scrap. When will yon. be ſo good a Husband- Five Years, I proteſt tis al- 
moſt .5ix. -- What ſay you Thomas? Ft ned nS 
Daſh. Thereabouts Sir. 13 
Scrap. And What do you think it coſt me? 
Mild. About Thirty Shillings. . f 5 
Scrap. But Fifteen, that's but half a Crown a Year, this is only by way of 
Inſtruction to teach you T rift. | ST EY 4 
Wild. Hair of that Colour wouꝰd not ſuit my Complexion Sir, tis too dark. 
Serep. Not ſuit it - Ile warrant thee--do but try it on, look there Daſb.-. 
do's it got become hi n a Thouſand times better then this Horſe. Tail? 


Wild: 


Y 


* 12 i 


” Oo i — — 1 
o , 
: 


A Care for YU 


2 


cm not ambitious of wearing fine Cloaths or long Wigs; but tis the faſhion 
vou ſee, and one muſt comply with the times, or run the hazard of being 
laught at N 2 

=XF Scrap. This Pride is the Plague of our Age · thoſe were happy times when 
= ordinary Cloaths were worn, and the Pockets well lin*d--now all goes to 
make a ſhow--You- ſhall ſee the Varlet ſtrut, and look big in his Lords caſt 


- 
0 


turn her out of Doors and her whole Eſtate*s about her. _ 
by 0 #Vild. The way of the world in little. One tin npbraids anot her, the Covet- 


Vyila.] ſuppoſe I make a very pretty Figure now (ace) Laſſure you Sir 1 


fuite, and her Ladyſnips Woman ſo-deckt, tis hard to know which is wich, 


> ous man rails at the Proud, he again at the Voluptuous, and fo they take 


their round: But this is not to my purpoſe- who knows but this may be the 
had beſt finiſh it. * 
| # - Scrap, What but Pride has brought our Afflictions and Taxes upon us?--yet 


: 


> Generons minute=-lfle try (aſide) Sir you have begun a good work, and you 


* inſtead of being hambled, our Arrogance increates daily--We are the Spawn- 


of thoſe old Grants wno were for carrying Heaven by Stortn--evey Womart - 


wears Babel upon her head, and defiance in her face--how can'ſt thon - endure 
that Kaſcally foretop on thy head? 


Daſh. Was ever the like heard, he preaches againſt Pride and is contriving - 


Murder (ade), 


Scrap, Well boy, beleive thy old Uncle--they may talk what they will of 


& Pruder'ce, Temperance, Chaſtiry, and a whole Catalogue of other Virtues-=- 


the neareſt way to hsppineſs. 


you have given me. 


me uch large hopes of Amendment Vle venture the other Five --there. 
| Wild. This wont do Sir. 


itors to a Compoſition. they will be glad of Twelve pence in the Pound, for 
Wild. Solus. How camei] to be ſo lucky a Dog to nick this giving momear ? 
care in a Flask of good Red, and the” to ſome Yeilding Fair. Bk 
When Mighty'F OV E deſcended from above, 


For ſabeing HEA EN to taſt of Mortal love, | 
He took a form more powerful then bis own, 


4 „ 1 9 
| es * ' 
— * 


Put Fruzality is vertue in ſhort hand, the Practice of Piety in a word, and 


Will. Sir i deſign to be an Example of frugality to all the Youth of the Age 
— hut fr | muſt clear my old Scores, which require-a larger Summ then 


7 


Scrap. Bob, poh, tis a great deal of Money I proteſt, but ſince thou giv'ſt® 


Scrap. What, hat- thou wilt tuine me at this rate prithee bring thy C red- 
all thy Debts are mark*d deſperate, (Ex. Scrap-Dafts. 


When have | taſted o lirgly before of his Bounty, or when ſhalll again? 
let me conſider now how to make good uſe of my Tallent--Firſk Ile drown all 


And in a ſnower of this came ratiling down, |. (Exit 


1% 


30 wefor JEALOUSIE 


5 CEN E, Sir John Thrivewells Houſe. 


Euter Sir John, and Coll. Blunt. 


Sir Jobm. Your Relation Sir is full of horror, ſuch as wou'd force tears even 
from indifferent Eyes z what then muſt be a wretched Fathers Grief ? 

Blunt. Moderate-- "= 

Sir John. Alas! Sorrow like mine can know no bounds, wild as the Storms 
that vex the troubled Ocean, it threatens nothing leſs then Univerſal Wrecks 

Pardon me Sir if my Misfortunes make me rude. 

Blum It grieves me Sir, that I have thus difturd'd your Quiet, But twas a 
dyeing Friends laſt requeſt, and con*d n*t be avoided —— Yet I rejoyce to ſee 
theſe falliag figns of an unfeigned Repentance —— If yet the knowledge of 
what is here tranſacted, remain to Spirits after diſſolution; - twill pleaſe m 
Dear Friends Ghoſt, to know me faithful, and you no more unkind. © 3 

Sir John. Heaven knows I never was why do I thusexcuſe my ſelf, the —_ * 
end has proved it--curſt fate! You ſeem to love his memory-therefore to yau-- 

Bl : Check the Violence of your Grief | beſeech you Sir. 

Sir John. To you Ile juſtifie my Aftions—— if I have erred *twas throngh _ © 
too much love, that made me try to draw him from thoſe Courſes, | then 
thought led him to certain ruine; but Providence had otherwiſe ordain d, 

5 and whom 1 ſought to ſave, I caſt away. 
Blunt. He never doubted your Love—he has with tears to me confeft 
4 your goodneſs, and at his Death ſo heartily bewailed his Folly — 
| Sir Jon. No more of that — call not thoſe Ills to my Remembrance, 
which I wou'd bury in Oblivion, as dark, and ſilent as his Grave — = Sende 
were well loſt con'd | forget but that — Oh Daughter ? your Brother—Oh! 7 


Enter Bellinda. 
Bel. Pray Sir do not afflict your ſelf ſo ſeverely, it makes me weep to ſee 


you thus. 
Sir John Had Heaven thought fit to take him by any Natural means, my 
loſs and Grief had then been common with other Fathers. 
Blum. He fell nobly———what better Fate cou'd you wiſh him, then to 
dye warn in Battle, Fighting his King and Countreys Caufe # 
Sir Joh». Had he ſought this Honorable Occaſion willingly, 
His Glorious Death had made Amends for all my 


Sorrow. but dire diſpair hurryed him to his Fate, 
And Ito dire diſpair. m_ 10 


lun Let me beg you Sir to think no more ont — if you thus reaſon ; 4 
with your Grief, 'twil never end. \ | 
Sir Joby. It never ſhall but with me. 


Enter 


A Cure for] EA LOUSIE 31 
Enter Loveday. 


F Loved. What may this Pomp of ſadneſs mean ? how now Blunt "ow ' what 
© can this buſineſs be? Sir Johm, and my fair one both in tears“ how 


charming Grief ſits in thoſe lovely Eyes ?--Sir I ask Pardon if 1 intrude upon 


© your privacies. 

Sir John. 1 Ask yours Sir--I ſaw you not, Grief has ſo wholly taken up my 
Sences they can't perform their functions. 5 
” Loved. may I k the Cauſe ? 


Sir Job». My Sons untimely end. 
4 Loved. Any new Circumſtance. 
Sir Jabs. *Tis all too faithfully related · this Gentleman was by his ſide 


US he received his Deaths wound. 
Loved. I ſhare in your forrow for him Sir, he was my friend. 


4 \ Euter Pimp: while they are talking and whiſpers Blunt. 


8 Blunt. A ſudden affalr calls me away Sir. — I hope you'l pardon the 
3 oſ my Departure. 
* Sir your Servant you were poor Frau: friend. 


js 


ive me — hence forward to call you mine tho 
1 will make me troubleſome company, 


pe to ſee you often. . 
2 le ſtudy to deſerve the Honor of your friendſhip... (unt. 


: 
a The End of the Third AQ, 


2 
= 
b —— CCGCGRPC — — — = - —— — . — * ) n 
* a a 
I 


ACT IV. Seexs The Piazza 
Enter Blunt, and Pimpw : 


| Blunt, Ws hr haſt told me wonders · thou deſerveſt Statues and lſeripti</ 
ons my dear Aercury. » 

Pimp. Mercary--a very pretty name that—pray who was that Gent, Sn? 

— The Founder of your Order, you Dog --he was a Petry Deity himſelf, 

and Pimp in ordinary to the whole Aſſembly. 

= Pimp Oh Sir, your humble Servant Tour very humble Servant; you 40 

ne too much Honour. 

Bl. But what uſe can we * Diſcoveries f 

_ Pimp, Can't yon * Sir. 


8 
77 7 
. 'KS 


N 


_ Cure for FEALOUSTE. 

Bl. Not I faith —1 rely pon thy Conduct. 4 
Pimp, Why then hut in the firſt place I muſt ask you a very Necef. 4 
ſary Queltion--perzaps you may think it a little impertinent--have you anf 

more money to ſpare ir? 

Bl. Ay, Ay, bring me but to ſpeak to her, thou ſhalt have what Money t thou Þ 
wilt, thou ſhale command my Purſe. | 
| » Pimp. My Maſter has a very good Opinian-of himſelf--he thii ks if he de = 75 
but give the Summons, the Fort mult ſurrender. (Aſide, ] 1 muſt have it down 
on the Nail, or I can't go one ſtep further, I told j ou that I have mollfy 4 the 
Chamber Maids neart, ſhe is the very Lock and Key to her Miſtreſs--Oyle her 
Springs but well. 

Il. Lundetſtand thee.- This Golden Rhetorick is to perſwade her to Term 
of Agreement- there * ( gives him money) N 

Pimp. Ay mar rf Sir: this will do the work--I'le be hang d if e re a Chan: 
ber Maid in this Righteous Town, is proof againſt theſe pretty ſhining O 

tors--you are too liberal Sir--for hall of this ſhe wou'd betray her Mrs. Body $ 
and her own Soul. 1 


ne W ell, well, drive your bargain as cunningly as you can, and take tbe 
0 erplus for your labour. | -. 

Pimp. * Tis thexjanly- way. to-have your work well done, not to ſtint ron F. 
pay -If this ſhould fail (which I Think next to impollibility) (I wk ſer m 
Wits to work again for you. (going) 

Bl. Hold, take this Letter with you. - 

Fin. N othing like it Sir, next to Kiſſes, ſoft, words are the moſt. preyailin! 
Arguments with a Lady, (Ex,) 4 

B!, So, if this Rogue ſucceeds what a happy Fellow mall I be--But am 10 * 
I to bla me, not to diſcover my ſelf, the old Gentleman takes on ſo heartily, 
it is barb:rous to keep him longer in ſuſpence--yet one day will break 6 
ſquares l hope, for I muſt poſſeſs this Damoſel.--Oh that I had her claſped it 
my longing Arms! the very thought is extaſy, and gives a 2 proſped 


of thoſe Joys to cer: Ha! the Diſconſolate Lay. * 
Ester Loveday 1 
Toved Now n 9614 ev hang howr4d al thy dies on my 
devoted Head, - yet I am ſtill unmavs dl. lor an OL 3 
Bl : In doleful dumps dir, does Be linda ye fromg ?, um i V 
Loved Name her not. ligf3 ame; 4 F 
[Blunt Hey days, what nb Wii O8 en ge e of. that b- 
"Melancholy look, that Careleſs dlouen ? 2E d death is there ſuch a diſagi een ble x 


Figure under the Sun, as a diſtruſtſul- Lover: Wou g £6, Heaven Bel ina 1 
you now, it would certainly melt her frozen heart inte Compaſſion. - 5 
Loved. ou are merry. Sig. 4 : 49 pla oW - ngo wit 
Zl. So woufd you be Sir, if you hat the fame pr olpy 70560 G or, a king 4 


dbudt 5 and caute 
leb 


un that you might but view it your (cf! a_ l 


A Cure for JEALOUSIE. 83 
leſs fears, I engage my Word, and Honour ſhe ſhall be yours. 
Love That indeed is undoubted Security--Your Intereſt muſt be extraot- 
dinary on ſo ſlender Acquaintance. | 
Bl. O Lord Sir, -thank my Stars, 1 have learnt not to ſtand upon Cere- 
mony,--1 love to be free with my friends, and all my Acquaintance I call ſo 
Aſſurance is my Intereſt. | ; 
7 Loved, That I muſt confeſs is a very Neceſſary Companion, eſpecially in 
== this Age. a 
Bl. It always was ſo · No Age ever was without it. 
\ Fe is the great Manager of this Worlds Affairs, and has clearly got the ſtart 
of Merit. 
we Loved. Ay but too much»- 
Bl: There is no ſuch thing in nature, as too much Aſſurance; They are the 
greateſt dealers in Love, who have the Largeſt ſtock of it, Lis in this, as in 
Wealth- poſſ:ſſion begets deſire; and we think we can never have enough--'tis 
2 at this time the Currant Coin of the Nation, and let me tell you the beſt Ti- 
tles you can plead to a Ladyes favour, are Impudence and an Eſtate, | 
\ Loved. They may do very well together--But how contemptible is a poor 
Rogue that is ſancy ? 6 
„Bln. True, Honourable Impertinence has the priviledge to be try*d by its 
' 7 Peers--Rudeneſs in Quality is Wit, and AﬀeCtation good Breeding - ſo ſure a 
foundation is Greatneſs for Aſſurance to build upon. — 
Loved. But in how loft a Condition mult that Lover be, who Mrs Ob- 
Adurate heart is proof againſt all the Allurements of Love and Intereſt ? 
'4 > Bl: Impoſſibilities / No Woman keeps ſo ſtrick a Guard over her paſſions, 
dut you may ſometimes ſet upon her at diſadvantage, if you would be a Lover, 
0 you muſt abound in Patience, be very diligent & obſerva nt watch evꝰry 
J Mook — mark each unguarded hour, till you can find the plyant Moment, 
10 make uſe of that and be happy till you may hope. 
4 | 1 That poor ſupport to wretches in Diſpair, — ev'n that is loſt 
BI Your Temper and mine are diſtant as the Poles, I am all Fire, you all 
Ice ſee the different effects of Love upon us two — I doat at this Minute 
co diſtraction, and wou'd give the world to enjoy But I don't ſigh and 
whine as you do, I flatter my ſelf with all the pleaſing Images ho pe can frame 


and fancy all I wiſh Imagination takes it free ſwing, and | have at 


NJ leaſt the pleafure to be agreeably deceiv'd. 

4 Loved. A Sanguine Lover“ 647 

un l: Nay more in ſpight of all the Artificial Coyneſs of their Sex, — ſpite 
Jof ten thouſand watchfull Spyes, and all the crafty diligence of a ſuſpici- 


3 us Jusband,——1 am reſolvꝰd to be bleſt with all the h ppine is conſenting 
ere can give. E ine 44.6 : * 

l| Loved. Tis well for you Col: that you have ſuch a Confidencein your Miſ- 

ule 


{ - » 6 
* . 7 3 * 
13 q 2: en T 4: 20k BY 
lc 1 9 1 44.4. . Co 89 ©- * i a 1 * 41 © 
* 


—— — 
% © 
1 


24 


— 


— 


4 cue fr JEALOUSIE 


B/ Imagination will make her fo when I pleaſe— 1 can't promiſe much 
for her il ne*re ſaw her but once, and then too en Paſſant; But Iam reſol- 
ved to ſee her again, and if pollible enjoy her. ' VET ; 

Loved An eaſy Conqueſt -— wounded at firſt ſight. 

El: Tis fate Sir, or rather Sympathy. 


Leved. You are belov'd then. | . 
Be am fo vain to think lam not hated,--her tell tale Eyes ſaid as much, 


which now and then ſtole a look tow*ds me, that had nothing of indiffernce, 
———[ don't diſpair. p26: 12 | 

- Loved. You have no cauſe—you nefre were curſt with killing frowns, nor 
have yet known the pain of numberleſs repulſes. 

Bl: Nor ſnou'd I diſpair if I had Woman has been my ſtudy i can unrid- 
dle all the My ſteries of the Sex, and do aſſure you that Miſtriſs is not worth 
taking, who yeilds on the firſt dummons if ſhe fortifyes for a Seige, ſhe is 
worth ſitting down before ] warrant her quit colt ar d trouble. 

Loved. Suppoſe ſhe ſhou'd prove of the Troy breed Col: and hold you to 
it ten years d' you think ſhe will quit coſt and trouble then? 

Bl: Ten year — faith that's a long time but few Ladyes or Towns are 


: 


ſo impregnable now a days relye on me for ſucceſs — to let you ſee 1 


prefer my Friends Intereſt to my own, I will break of this Chace, and go in- 
ſtantly to Zellada I have already done you ſome ſervice there: | 

Lo: ed. Sir you oblige me ever;--Yet take this Caution with you, (for I have 
a thouſand doubts which ſtill per plex me) ſee no foul play be offered, if there 
is, I (hall forget all former Obligations, and plunge my Sword into your Faith- 
leſs Hearr. * | ö 0 „ 2M 

Bl still doubting and diſtruſting ?. thou wilt make a more then Ordinary 
good Husband, thou art fo damn'd Jealous a Lover, my honour be your 
Pledge, which when J forfeit, may all the miſeries due to perjury puniſh mine 
--You ſhall ſhortly be convinc'd of my ſincerity. © 


Loved. Auſpicious Fates go with you - - (Ex. feveraty. 
SCENE, Sir Johns Hoe, 
Enter Bellinda. 


Bell. To ſtruggle more is vain, for all my vertre 
So powerful once, weak and ſucceſſleſs proves, 
When | wou'd drive this Stranger from my ſon], 

L have his Lovely mage ſtill in View ; 

His Charming tongue, his Perſon, all his Actions, 
In my too faithful memory are planted, 

Ne ire to berooted out. Vor 2614.34 

Oh Loveday | well has fate reveng'd thy wrongs, 

uſtice purſues my Scorn--as [ or'e thee, 
do's this Conqu'rour tryumph over me. 


»”. RA » © = _ PR 
* N * a 1 _ 
-. ” a 5 : — * * 
- I ay þ 1 » <> F Fs : 
-4 * d.< >> a * 
N 4 * — "0 - — 


A 


<A 


ö A Cure fo J EALOUSIE. 36 


Rees Arabella 


Ara, victory, victory have won the day. 


Bell What mighty Conqueſt have you gain d? 
Arab. Tis hardly worth naming- only a perverſe fellow wis poſſeſt with a 
. fit of Jealouſie, and pretended to recrench my prerogative-- till | Souldier like 
*X rally*d my ſcattered forces, and ſtood the bruat Courageonſty- he was glad to 
= fue for Peace. 9s 
N Bell. Ihe Engagement ſure was pleaſant. 
$2 #4 Arab You wou'd have ſaid fo, had you ſeen how I bronght my haughty 
Tyrant to his ſubmiſions--the men may claim what pow'r over us they p'caſe, 
but they are all our Slaves, the Young to our Eyes, the Old to our Tongues. 
> Fell. Woud my Eyes were ſo us'd to Victory. 
> A. Are they not? I am ſure poor Loveday feels their force you are to 
blame to uſe him ſo, ds 
Bel. Loveday! mean Conqueſt- That General deſerves but little Glory, 
- who only boaſts the gaining one poor Battle. | 
> Ara. Oh, you ſet up for Univerfal Empire, —-don't deccire your felt 
good Belinda — neither our Eyes or Tongues have that Power, the Men 
won't endure ſuch Monopolizers in Authority. WS 
\ Biel. My Ambition Joes not fly to igh —1 deſire only a fair Exchange, 
=== Heart for Heart. | h 
Arab. Truly that's but Reaſonahle— Who is this mighty Heroe you 
j Vou'd Capitulate with on ſich eaſie rerms ? | 
Bel. A ou'd I cou'd anſwer that — tis my Misfortune not to know, — 
I! never ſaw him *ill this day, and then he brought the Certainty of our 
dear Brothers Death. ; 1 | 
Arab. You don't know what Execution yon may have done—you wou'd 
ke. = —4 him begin his Acquaintance with Love? *Tis too ſoon to talk 
ot that. 5 | | | 1 * 
Bell: He mentions nothing elſe—'tis pitty indeed he ſhou'd —He does his 
Subject ſo much Juſtice, — his Wit is Matchleſs, his Speech Bewitching- - 
and ery word falls with that Graceful Cadence from his Tongue , as if all 
= Harmony refided there, and he was made for the deſtruction of Wo nan kind. 
Arab. Bleſs m: Siſter — don't you Rave? Juſt now all your aim was 
to be poſſeſſor of his Heart, and now you fay his whole diſcourſe is Love, 
and yet you are not ſatisfied, . 8958 
Bel. Matiy talk of Love who think of nothing leſs——alafs he pleads a- 
nothers Cauſe — all his Rhetorick was us d for Loveday, h: deſcanted lar- 
gely on all his Accompliſhments, but inſiſted chiefly on his great Eſtate, as 
thinking it the molt prevailing Argument. I hearken'd with Attention, not 
= minding half ſo much the matter of his diſcourſe, as ſtriving to ſuck ub 
with greedy haſte each Charming werd-thus inſeafibly is my heart ſtol'n 
away, while 1 get nothing in Exchange, but a few ſounding words, 1 
| F 2 OY | 3 


* 
w 
. 
"4 


. 


36 I Care for JEAL OUSIE. . | 
* e Well, Ivo I don't pitty you ——you are met with now for your 
Rigour to poor Loveday. 4 

Enter Betty. 


Bet. Oh Madam have been looking you all about — ill I am at 1 
weary, as any thing. | : "a 


Aral. For what? 3s 
Ber. Oh] have the ſtrangeſt News to tell you Madam —fye; out upon 
the Wicked Man. 
Arab: What do's the Girl mean ?. 
Bet.” 1 did not think it had been in the Malice of Man, for an old Cut- 
Throat as he is. 
Arab. prithee what's the matter? a 
Bet. The moſt Horrid Contrivance the deſperat ' ſt Villany 
3 Arab Speak it then. 
Bee. Your Ladyſhip: does n't conſider that tis not fit to be told before | 
every one, not that | diſtruſt you, Madam. (zo Bell.) "> 
Bel. | am not every body, good Mrs. Betty. 
Bet. Daſh has told me all 
Arabs This Wenches Impudence is. intollerable. I doubt thou haſt been 
Tipling, and Talk in thy Sleep —*tis all a Pream. 
* * Ay, ay, I wiſh it were all a Dream tis too true, the more ſhame | 
Arab Art Mad? Prithee ſay what thou haſt to ſay, or hold thy Tongye. 
Ber, My Maſter has a deſign to Murder you:. 3 
Arab. impoſlible ! " 


Bel. Moſt Barbarous ! 
Zet. No, no, "tis very plain— your Ladyſhip knows. that Thomas has been | 
_ my humble Servant, and now to get into my Favour has told me all the 
n. 
3 +. nh Uabeard of Cruelty--what ſnou d urge him to ſo baſe an Attempt! 
3 het. It ſeems your Ladyſhip and he had. ſome ſharp words this Morning, ® 
you threatned Revenge, and he has ever ſince been poſſes t with ſuch Appre- | 
1 henſions of it, that he fancies every moment ſome Rody comes to Kill him, Sy 
and is refoly'd, by way of prevention to be bzfore hand with you. 5 
| Bel. This is a Villany ſo Monſtrous, 1 can ſcarce credit ir. py 
Arab. There is no Gaſeneſs ſo gr ge eat, but he wou'd be Guilty off, 1 want 1 | 
my Father, he has Match'd me haely — When and how is this to be el. 3 
| | tected / 
Ree, To Morrow as your Ladyſhip takes your Mornings Walk. Daſh un- 
dartook it to get a little Moneꝝ, but in his Hears utterly Abhors the B. 
buity of the Fact. Pi 
Arab. Is he to be. truſted / N 
Jet. Ldare Vouch for him Madam. 


* : 
* 
\ : 
* 


\- 


FN 
* * 9 
. 


4 are for ' VY * . * 7 
1 co home, and wait in my. Chamber, I ſhall have buſineſs for you--- 
good uſe may be made of this — I am ſure Wildifh and Olinda will joyn 
with mel am reſolv'd to drein his Purſe, which will to him be a great- 


Arab. 


3 er Puniſhment, then dreining his Hearts Blood. 
1 


Bel. You ſhall ye wich me to Night Siſter, you ſhan% go home to tlie 


Old Beaſt. 


Ar. There*s no danger to night, - he depends upon too morrows Slzughter-- 
if | go not home he will miſtruſt my Intelligence, and I ſhall quaſh my own 


=” hopeful project. | 
Fel. Dear Arab. ſtay with me, 1 ſhan' t ſteep elſe. 


Aral. 1 dare ſwear be is more afraid of me then | am of him, never diſ- 
ade me, I am reſolv d to go. i | 
© Bell, Why will you run into ecrtain danger when you may ſo eaſily avoid it? 
Ara. Don't I tell you I have reſol rd it -a Wo:uansrefolntion is her rea- 
= fſon--pray not a word oi this. *% | 
Bell. You deſign to keep me waking to night then? 3 
A,. You wou'd not be fo much out of faſhion as to fleep the firſt Night you 
are in Love,--you may as well expect it on your Wedding N'ght--Love and 


= Reſt are meer Contradictions. | 


N 


Bell; If you wi go Erovidence protect you--ſhall Eſee you in the morning?” 


> Arab. Without fail, (Ex. Atabell.) 


” Rell. Heavens! with hat force this lovely ſtranger pleads, and in anothers 
© Cauſe promotes his own © Loved: I know is what he ſpeaks him, rich, young, 
> handſome, and faithful, yet ſuch is my unlucky fate, | cannot meet his Love 
with mutual Ardour. ha! Zoveday, here! | J 


Enter Loved: : | 

Loved. My feet have brought me hither in ſpight of me (a/ide) Madam, 1 
trove Yobey your rigid Sentence, but | find I cannot live but under the A 
pect of thoſe Bea'1teous Eyes, I name not Love, but only wou d be forgiven tho 


le Preſumption of a viſit at fo unſeaſonable an hour 


Bel. Your Viſits | nece denyed Sir ——banth but Hated love your thoughts, 
and 1 ſhouid willingly imbrace your Friendſhip, | | | 

Loved. No, doom me rather to Eternal abſence—to be always in fight of 
joy, yet rage in endleſs miſery, is the worſt torment that the wicked know. 


Bell, Your Choice is free Sir if you think abſence will be your cure, I ſhawt 
prevent it. | 
© Loved: Cari you with ſach-indifference behold a tortured wretch expiring a- 
a his pulns6t your fort? comamber you 808 the cours as Wl ee 
Bell, Think me not thus cruel—no Sir, I am fenfible of your . Generous 
paſſion, and know your Merits claim a juſt return--Nay Nu. I too burn 
with the ſame deſtroying flame which conſumes your Quiet. 


"« 


Zoved: 


"Cre fr JEALOUSIE © 


* 
4 


ved, HA did I hear, you right, or did I dream of bliſs? WT 5 


Goon thou vertuous Charmer, and jull my Ears 1 n = 
EINE „% io... A 5 
Bell, Ves, | doe love, but--- eee e e e ti 7 
Loved. What? | 7p | 8 * 
Bell. Blame not me, but my Unhappy Stars. <p 


Loved, Let the Stars and fate do their, worſt, if you pronounce me happy. 
Bell. wih cout. A ye 2 
Lozed. Then'tis illuſion all, no real joy--So the poor Mariner in fight f 

his wiſh'd Haven, is by ſtorms driven back into the boiſterous Ocean, and. 

there loſt-- What mean you Madam ?- Otis you alone can make me bleſt. 

Bell. | wou'd Heaven krows if it were in my power. . 
Loved. Not in yout power] this ridd le is to intricate for me to ſolve, dark, 
and obſcure, it quite confounds my reaſon, my troutled the uzhts bode trea- 


chery and falſhood. | 7 3 ay 0 
Bell Muſt I then make a confeſſion ? at which, al that is Vertuous in m 
ftarts · Know then my heart is not my ow" to give, and ſince tis tome com- 


fort to the Miſerable to have partners in their Woe, be aſlured lam more 
wretched then you can imagine your ſelf to be. „ 1 
Loved. Tis ſo this Villain inſtead of aſſiſting me has betray*d me, be ſtill 
my reſentments, (aſide] You thi K ſo perh+ps Madam we are often more hap- 
PY then we believe our ſel es, if Appetite or Paſſion get the upper hand of us, 
tis hecauſe we won't be at the pains to ke p them under. | | 
Bet. Le ſe Philoſophy wc ud h come your Love better Sir. ee 
Loved. You may Madam inſult my weakne Is, and tr yumph or'e my follies.- 
by Heavens bright Juſtice my Riv I [kall rot long - ( Exit | 
| Bell. | was too blame to give him this hint -who knows what will be the 
conſequence of his fury- his Eyes lookt fiery red, Deſpair, and Indignation 
change d his uſual form. Nee | — 


1 if pirgius Prajers are heurd butt 2 
Defend you Guardian Angeli whom I lo. (Ex) © 00:39 /1029: 


758 Ss CEN E, Scrapalls Eise. 
I e Enter Betty with a leite . 
Deny. Well, what Lye can L invent A porter leſt it, · I donꝰt ko 


#lioffi it tötmes from, . T forgot tö ace the Queſtton — Nothing boytitis 
Dear Gold could have tempted me to incur my Ladyes diſpleaſure, which: 


F inalt ceftatily expect. Her Chaſtity is Lutter Proof I am ſute=- yet m 
Witter is a very — ih a Manger. 18 o $15 3179 7 FA A E176; { 34 32 1 
a SHLD WOY Nn nt te He au 9 


Enter 


Aue for JEALOUSTE. 39 


ct 150] 255544 <5 NE 
dier Arabella, | | 
| | Yours - E 9 1 
5 Arab. Here's a Letter left for your Ladyſhip. --- Now muſt I prepare for 
4. a Storm --- the Clouds gather on her Brow. 
"We Scrap.2 Ha! a Leiter !- from ſome of her Amoretto s no doubt, I am 
" Peeping. 5 ready to burſt, jet ile have patience, and obierve 'em farther 
5 1 - down Spleen. a | g 
Bet. Now ie burke C4 5th (afrae.) 
Arab, Who brought this Letter Huſſy? 
Bet. A, a, az Porter. , 
Arab. A, a, Porter | how durſt you take it? Han't I given you Orders 
to the commrary-:-- what tho? I have a Jeal>uz humourſome Husband,. who in- 
deed deſerves che werlt of wage; dos it conſiſt with my Honour to receive 


” — —. 
” 4 -. v7 

( 2 IS "A 4 0 ; 

- 


: 


„ 


* 7 


» ſuch filthy Scrowls ? 
Betr. Your La 


* 


cual Never cfi-r to excuſe your ſelſ -- your Stammeriag betrays your 
© Guilt---go get my things ready in my Dreſſiag Room, and tell Oiinds | wou'd 
be glad to lee her there--- your late good Service attones for this fault, the 
next ſuch you that ont of Doors. TOI (Exeunt Arab. Betty.) 
” Scrap, (Comes forward. ) Odsbud, I can hardly believe my own Sences, L 
have hid ſuch convinci::g profits of her Falſehood, that tis impoſlible I ſhau'd 
= be dectiy'd--yut her Age ſhem'd real--I know not what to think (calls Daſs, 
(Enter Daſh.) I doubt T0945 I have been too raſh in giving thee ſuch Or- 
ders I have now ggoit reaſon. to believe my Wife Innorent. 
Daſh. Hou $ir Na it he cools farewell hopes (aſrae.) L 
Scrap. I juſt now over heard her rebuking her Maid, for bringing her a 
Love Letter, with a paſſion ſo far from Counterfeit, that I begin to think 
her Innocent. - | | 
| Daſh Alais Sir, how eaſliv are you imposd upon! Now l know yoo are 
abusd, Ile looſe my Life rather then ſuff:r it, to my certain knowledge 
” Whar yon ſay was a Contrivance between them ? : 
Scr. Art ſuie on ? | | 
| Daſh. Very (ure Sir, -- She ſaw you all the while, and feign'd that Anger 
with her Maid, only to delude you 
Scr By my troth likely enough, - how cams't thou to know this? 
Da | heard em Sir Laughing at the Trick they had ſerv'd you. 
Scr. Dots ſhe Laugh - her note will be chang'd 'ere long,” 
Daſh. Beſides Sir, were ſhe Innocent, there's no retreating now. I have 
already hic'd two Bravo's at 26 Guinea's a Man to do the Buſineſs. 
Ser. How Daſh 20 Guineas a Man! what 40 Guineas ? VE 
Daſh, Times are bad Sir, -I ſtood hard too, -- they proffer d to Butcher 
her for 10, but to do is decently, 20 was the loweſt Penn. | 
Scr. Tis curſed Dear for a Murther, -I wou'd commit 20 my ſelf for half 
the Sum, -- but ſo the work were done, I ſhou'd endeavour. to be ay bs 


SI. 


2, * 


* , 
40 


Peace - coſt me Forty Se to Murther her ! a Cockatrice. 


Aue for JEALOUSIE. 
Forty Guineas | a Jilting Whore-- Ille teach her to Cuckhold a Juſtice of 


Dab. Tas well | had this "yy ready, all had been unravell'd elſe. 
Scr. (Turning.) Thomas. 

DP. 1 come Sir. | {Excunt.) 

* Enter Arabella 2 Olinda. : 

Arab Come Olinda, you muſt confeſs a truth to me ·- han c you very En- 


tertaining thoughts alone, that you ſeek all occaſions to avoid Converſation? 


'Olnd. Why do you ask this Madam? 
| Arab. Becauſe 1 bave often taken notice of it; I ſtill obſerve amidſt all 
your natural Briskneſs, and Gaiety, ſome Intervalls of Languiſnment, now 
and then a Sigh ſtarts unawares to betray you, which you flily endeavour to 


* Suppreſs. 


Oh And from this I warrant you conclude me in Love. | 

Arab. Certainly. 

:Olind, Ha, ha, ha,--any body but you wou d 1ather have gueſt, the dead Pally 
was upon me 

Arab. Never ſtrive to veil your thoughts, 4 know them by my own, -- 
there*s none of us ali (we may diſſemble if we will, but have a Natural ten- 
dency that way, when once we have told Foureen. 

k Olind. How, all Lovers after Fourteen ! nay then tis a Loving World 

ndeed. 

Arab. Tis true, our inclinations vary like our Pallates, -- ſome Admire the 
Gay Fop, who is ail Wig and Stei kirk, - others your Thundring Sons of 
Meri, whe Love by Art Military--and ſome few, a very few, the Man of 
Wit and Tolid Senſe. - 

Olind. And for which of theſe do you think 1 Sigh ? 

Arab That you muſt tell me —- to ſive your Blufhes, 

Fle name the Sparks moſt likely to be your Admirers, 

And when I hit the Man. 
Olinda, What then? 
Arab. Do you clap your Fan to your Face. 

Olind. A pretty way to hide a Bluſh. B 

Arab. Is Loveday che happy Man? (She I her Fan.) 1 ſee you fhake him 
off-- Whar think vou of Spartiſp? (ſhe Lanes) You know him too-well 1 
perceive.--- Does not your Cozen ¶uaiſb run too much in your mind (puts 


ber Fan to her Face) Now let me Imbrace, and Love you more then ever 3 he 


Loves you too, to me he ownfd it. 
Olind. *Tis ſtrange his Modeſty ſhou'd conceal it from yo. 
Arab. He fas his reaſon -- his Father you may have — leſt him and 
his Eſtate to your Fathers Guardianſhip ,. and Care, and being a Thrifty 
Man, fo ordered by his Wilh that neither fhoufd be at his Sons or 4 
till the full Age « 26 * Which he {till wants a Year.) 


A Cure for JEALOVUSTIE. At 
Olind. What's this to his Paſſion for me?? 
Ar. Not being Maſter of his Eſtate, he declared to me he thought himſelf 
unworthy of you. 

Olind, Pooriy thought ! 
My Love's above the little thoughts of Intereſt 
Give we the man ! like, be he ne re ſo poor. 
= Arab. A good fortuneand him you like won'd do much better, the hotteſt 
Love will quickly cool, without ſome maintainance to ſupport ic.Suppoſe For- 
tune ſhall luckily give Mildiſh his Eſtate, wou'd that leſſen hlm in your eſteem? 
BY Olind, No certainly dont deſpiſe Riches, Pomp, and ſplendour, 
yet 1 ſhould rather chooſe a m edle State with him I love, then Millions with 
the Man [ hate. Sis, 

>> Ar. What will you ſay if I be the means of getting him his Eſtate, and you 
© portion ſuitable to it? | | 
r 8 Olind. I ſay it is not to be done while my Father lives, and I don't yet ſee 


any likelyhood of his Death. 
> Ar. My Influence is great over him of late. 

0 l. Not jo great as his money s,. Profit is the Compaſs he ſteers by--prove 
there is hopes f that in your deſign, and perhaps I may beleive it probable. 
Ar. Truſt my Management, and doubt not to ſee it ſpeedily effected 

l have adeſign in hand can't fail but we forget our Mornings Walk, —tis 
late let's haſte to Bed. 
1 5 Let fortune to my Ii it propitious prove 


5 I hall be bleſs*d with Peace and you with love. (Exeunt. 
2 | S CE N E, The Street, | 3 
5 4 Enter Sparkiſh, with Fidales as to a Serenade. 


Spark. Oh the Infinite pleaſure of Serenading a new Marryed Woman! 
l wor'd not loſe this Opportunity to be the great MOGUL, — *Gad 1_ 
don't know which to me is the greater ſatisfactlon, making the Wife amor. 
ous, or the Husband Jealous—this Lady I am ſure is damnably in Love with 
me, and the old Coxcomb her Hushand damnably Jealous — Now have 1 a 
dong whieh I deſign to ſing purpoſely to increaſe both—come tune your In- 
X ſtruments——this is the Window No ſooner will ſhe hear my moſt Melodi- 
2X ous Voice, but ſhe will be all o're Tranſports, Ectaſy, and Rapture.—Gad ſhe l 
go nighto Cackold him in Imagination, tho? in his A1 ms. | 


4 Muſique play's, ard he Sings. F 
6. | SON G. 
JF | WE 7 

Hf k, fair One, beark tis Muficks Voice, 


From Sleeps dull load be 
Leave Dreams for more Subſtantial — 
Jo which Love Summons thee, 
3 6 


42 A Cue for FEALOU 
With fainter Rey for Venus fr 
ith fainter Rays ſee Venus jhnes 
VNfr dares for Morning ſtay, N 
To you her Station ſhe Reſigns , 
Kiſe and bring on the day. 


(3. 
A ready from Od Tythons Arms, 4 
His Youthful Bride is fled : A 
Ad Bluſhing for Negleted Charms, 
Paints the Clear Sky with Red. 


| (4) p ha 
O an not Touth thus Idly loſe, Rs 
Leave, leave, the Sleeping Drone, un 
Wiſely for thy own Wiſbes chooſe, f x 
And let him Snare alone. 8 hi 


12 


Serap. ( Above at a Window) What Caterwawling have we here? Screech.' dei 
Owls under my Windcw at this time are Ominous;- ſome of my Dear Spouſ. *% 
es Adorers without queſtion ; --- Theſe Serenading Lovers ate of ſuch a fiery _\; | 
Conſtitution, it may not be amiſs to give them a-Cooler, --- prithee Daſb go y 
and prepare for their Reception.-- We will be with yon again Mr. Tweedle. un, 
Tweedle-wm, in an inſtant, you fhall have ſomething to moiſten your Throat 

Spark, I heard the Window open--poor Soul, ſhe has given her old Drone! Jul 
the ſlip, and is kiz1ly ſtealing down to make an Aſſignation; Ihe diſmiſs theſe” ® 
Fellows--I have no further buſineſs for you to Night Friends-- there's ſome me 
thing to make you drink; Rat me, Iam the Fortunateſt Fellow in theſe Caſk & 
vader the Firmament, not a Woman can reſiſt me--I have Darts for the whok E 
Sex, from Fifteen to Fifty. The Countrey Lady I Charm with my Dre, * 
City Wives with my Bree ging, and the Quality Love me for my Scandal.— 
hem, hem I ſhall get a terrible Cold if ſhe makes me ſtay any longer— bb“ 
Ground is damp, and the Fog pred'giuuſ}s Offeniive - - Perhaps a pinch t ine 
twe of Snuff will relieve we (4: be takes Snuff they throw W ater on him Oh the 
Devil? am ruin d /-:undone ! | Swim i an VUcean of filth; Urine ! my Wig!Z 
my Snuff! fogh, how it ſtinks:. H wound give 100801. I were a Snake, and 7 
cou'd caſt my Skinn--] will rur ingeſſantly to the 8agnio,and Iye in ſoake there 
= Fortnight at leaſt ——Oh D I Serenading. (Running off meets Wildiſh.) 

Wild Well, and who the Devil are you, and where are you going upon ah 


. 
_ 


4 
»S 
\ 


Wild To looſe thy Money old Boy, ha! —— Gad I was in haſte till I had 1 


5 Lie Light Sir, Light. 


— 


| 4 Cure for J EA LO US IE. 45 
== 11d. Come hither Sir rah —let me ſee who I have got here, Tom Sparkiſh ! 


Peu met my Noble Faſhion Monger — thou could'{t not have come in 2 
'E time--wilt thou disburſe to an honeſt Topers Necellities ? 


== Spark. Wildiſh - and Confounded Drunk! or elſe he wou'd never ask 
Ich a fooliſh Queſtion tis not I b2live in the memory of Man, that ever 
Beau lent Money. | 
RX Wild. Why lookee Tom, I am confounded Drunk, and to tell you the truth, 
have hal confounded ill lucx tis all gone, not a Penny left Faith, But 
hang dirt, thou ſhalt lend me Five Pound. i | 
S park I have not patience enough to give him a Denyal, prithee , ildiſu 
unhand me I have been moſt Barbarouſly us*d. 
id. Where when, by whome? ha! 
Spark What ſort of an Appearance do I make I wonder, don't I bear the 
+ 1 men of a drown*d Rat? Do you ſee this Wig Jack? 
4 404. Faith Tom thou haſt put too much Eſſence, and little or no Pow- 
der inf. 
pr, May I never be ſweet again, if it did not coſt me five and twenty 
Pond t'other day, and now tis nt fit for a disban ded Enſign to wear. 
I Suit too, the Ladyes darling is utter! ſpoilt.-- The poor Creatures will 
\-eEftainly all go into Mourning for my Eclipſe. Fe. 
ind. A heavy Misfortune--but ſh w ne the Houſe - if I don't. do thee 
(. Mice upon the Glaſs Windows; ſay | am not worthy to borrow 5 1. | 
erb. If I dont get ridd of th s Drun' en Pupp”, he will infallivly betray 
me into the hands of the W. ten, and I ſha!l be kept in the Rownd Hosſe till 
Ming in this pickle. -- Sho d any bo y tee m · in this filthy Condition, it 
od certainly go to my Heart, and Ku: .. e {aſide} No Sir i thank you--Ple 
| - my ſelf _—_ | wou?d not ſee her again to ſave her Soul and 
1 y. | xit ) | ( 
Mild. Go thy ways for a Fop--! wou'd try my Fortune once more, if I 
ew where. -- Let me ſee who will lend an honeſt Fellow and a Cuckhold 
er Five Pound. -- My Viiſtreſ I have drein'd, -elſe l were ſure of a Sup- - 
there.-- Ple ev n to her Husband, - he is a good Natur'd Cuckbold, I can 


|} 

4 

1 that for him Come hither Rogue, (t Link Boy) Sirrah, do you know 
geilo“, the Grocer ? EY | | 
) oh oy. Yes Maſter, Ile Light you thither. —_ 59832 

n 4 id. Hold, you Dog, this is the Houſe. | \ 


Soy. No Sir, tis in the next Street. | Mr 
— You Lye, you Son of a Whore · this is it what lam not ſo Drunk 
er. 1 | Hern 

t . Not enough for my purpoſe. | S oh wn | 

1 F ho, What are they all dead? a 244 


=. | 2 . 2 0 . «GI 0) . 
. They are alt a Bed and & Sleep Sir, - tis ſcarce Day vet. 
ia. Will you Lye Sirrah? -- Do's not the Sun Shine full in my Facg? 
; ocks again.) © TIS (2 2700 tien e liebs amof ig wan > 82 
| | 1 £1 By- 


. 


44 A Care for JEALOUSIE 

Boy. Tou difturb all the Neighbours Sir. 

Wiid. Hold your Prating Sirrah, as you tender yonr . 

Frunello. (Above at the Window) Who's there ? 

Wild. Tis l, thou Prince of Grocers. ' Tis | | 

Pru. Who are you? and what's your Buſineis? My Neighbour Clack, the A 
Mid wife lives next Door. 7 

Wild. The Devil take thy Neighbour Clack, -- will ſhe lend me Fir . 
pound. Hearkee Tom, will you open the Dor, or muſt I wait! 4 

Pru. What's your buſineſs ? 6; | 

Wild. Or ly to Borrow Five Pound, - I have had Damanfd ill luck at Flo, £2 
and Joſt all my Money. a 

Pru. Five Pound 7 Pox on you for a Drunken Puppy, - Is this a time © 
borrow Money. Plague Confound him, -- Poor Peg has cauſe to Cure, 
him, I han't been in ſuch a humour, I don't knw « hen. 5 

Mia. Mumble-- Mumble. - will you let me in or no, you Sncaking Cen bY 

Fru. Cuckhold ! Odsbobs- hearkee Friend, con t you miſtake your Man- 
ha, ha, ha! a very good jeſt I faith - tis a ſign he is no Acquaintance of wine, 
Cnckhold! ha, ha, ha! 

VFYild *S death you Snivelling Raſcal- do yeu give a Gentleman the Lys, 

I fay you are a Cuckhold, and my Cuckhold too, that's more. 

Pri. You are a Drunken le le Fellow,--and Ile have you laid by the Hee! 
here, Y/Vatch, VV arch, (Enter Corſtable and Watch.) Mr. Conſtable, pray tan 
that Sawcy Companion into Cuſtody, and carry him to the Rowna Hou/e- \ 

a Cuckhold! ha, ha, ha. (Ex.) 

Conſt. What's the meaning you make a Diſturbance in the Street, at the %y 
Unſeaſonable hours, Friend? 

Vila. You are a very Impertinent Fellow to ask--Ile have you to 150 \ 
Sitrah--| le make what Diſturbance 1 pleaſe--and you area Son of a Who 
to hinder me.” 

Watch, What abuſe the Conſtable, knock him down. 

Conf. Let him reſiſt at his . lee-here's the Staff of Authority. . 
Wild. And here's the Sword of Juſtice, which will infallibly ſlit your Cos 
cemb, unleſs you lend me Five Pound. 3J 

2. Watch. Fall on--fall on- doun with him, down with him. 

VVild. Stand off Raſcails--don*t preſs upon Quality--] am Quality—- 
Fug A fig for your Quality, diſarm, and. bring n to the Ke 

an ſe Fi 

Wild. | am a Peer ot the Realm, you Sons of Whores. # : 

_ Conſt. Away with him, away with him. 3 

34 Watch. Take care what we do good Mr, Conſtable. Theſe Gy 
oiks are dangerous People to meddle with. 

4tb. Watch. So they be Neighbour Waleful, ſo they be. There% a light 
Juſtice Scrapealls - perhaps his Worſhip, op Mr. Oh may. be ſtirring - 
Kad beſt carry bim thither. 

Conſt. My Neighbour adviſes notably: come my Maſters let's have him 
love the Juſtice. 


IN 


Conf. He is a Peer then tis well we took my Neighbours advice, we 


A Cure for JE ALOUSIE. By 45 
Omne. Ay, ay, away with him to the Juſtices Worſhip. (Fxeun.) 
Enter Scrapeall in his Night Gown and Cap, and Daſh. 


Scrap. Haſt thou waſht away all the Caterpillars Thoma: ? 
Dal All Sir, pray to Bed. 
Scrap. | ſhan't fleep, what ſhou'd I do there? 

Daſh. You diſorder your Health by riſing at this unſeaſonable hour. 

Scrap. *Tis but this night 1 hope I ſh ll live in this terror. . | 

Daſh. But to night Sir, I have taken care ſhe ſhould be diſpatcht within 
this hour, therefore pray go to Bed, and try to Sleep. ( Knocking.) 

Scrap, Heark !:--do®ſt not thou hear a Naiſe, the Aſſaſinates. are comiug- 
lam a Dead Man, oh, oh / help, help? | 

Daſh, *Tis only your Fear, ro matter if he were dead, (de.) there's no 
body coming. | = 

Scrap Oh, Oh! : 

Daſh. Pray Sir govern your ſelf, or you'l ruine all. 

Scrap. Nay but In, tell thie they are coming--heark 1 (Knock again.) 
keep 2 out good Thomas, are all the Doors faſt, and the Window Shutters 
Barr d. 

Daſt. All Sir al, Who's there ? 

Conſt+ Tis | Mr. Daſh, is his Worſhip ſtiri ingꝰ 

Dafh. Lis Mr. Bucksbead the Conſtable Sir. 

Scrap. Are you ſure tis he? have a care who you let in good Dab, peeps 
thro' the Key hole, it may be a Sham--and d' you here fetch the Blunder- 
buſs that's Charged with 6 Brace of Fullers--bring my Ammugition Sword 
too, and my Bandjicers -*is good to be ſecure. e 

Daſh fetches 4, luder hi, a: he opens the Door Scrap. Cocks and pre- 
ſemis, the Conſtable ſees it. runs back, and throws domm 2 or Watchmen. 
iff. Watch. What's the matter Man? | 

Serap. Oh it is your Neight.our Buckzhead I proteſt I was afraid Rogues 
were Breaking in to Rob me. 

Conſt, I heartil- beg your Worſhips Pardon for coming at this Unſeaſo- 
nable hour;---we took this Spark Committing Outrages in the ſtreet, and 
were carrying him to the Ro Houſe, but he cry'd he was a Peer of the 
Realm, which made us afraid to meddle with him;-- therefore we came to 
know your Wöorſhips pleaſure in the matter, how we ſhall diſpoſe of him? 

Scrap. You: act like careful ho1eft People,--Men fit to be in truſt for the 
Nation. NE By | | | 

Wild. Some Small-Beer, and a pair of freſh Dice you Dog (Daſh looks in bi 
Face) will you lend me Five Pound? | ; | 

Daſb. Bleſs me Sir, tis Mr. Wildiſii. 

Wild. Six-bar Doublets a peice. 

' Serap. | know this Noble Peer very well, now Mr. Conſtable you may. leave 

him with me -- Ile ſce he ſhalt be forth coming 


have. 


46 A Cure for JEA LOUSIE. 
hare been ſwing! d off elſe. Good morrow to your Worſhip. (Ex. Conſt. & Wa, 
Scrrp. Good morrow Neighbours, -- So Sir, is your promis d Reformation 
ccme to this? no ſooner a penny in your Pocket, but you are at your old 
Trade of Drinking and Gameing ? * : 
Daſh, Alas Sir he is paſt hearing, you can make nothing of him now. 
Screp I hope I may Thoma:; -Vle ſearch for the Ten Pieces I gave him this 
Aſternoonz+-not one Farthing left! —— (Searches his Pozkets. 
Wild. Seven's the Main- Ile ſet you Ten Pieces. 198 
Scrap. Now I don't wonder which way they are gone, -O Extrayagance ! O 9 
Prefuleneſs! Ten Guineas in leſs then ten hours! What will this World br f 
come to? carry the Beaſt io, and throw him any where till he recovers his * 
Sences.-He is not kt to live among Sober People. N 


Ihe End of the Foutti Act, . 


The Fifth A C T. 
Enter Olinda, to her Arabella, 


4 W unfortunate am I, to beſtow my Heart on fuch a wild De- 
| 1 bauchee? 
Ar. G'morrow Olinda- are you ready for our Morniags walk? how in tears? 
Olind. What an Imminent danger have I na riowly efcap*d ? how can 1 
bleſs my Stars enough for this diſcovery . I wou d not have him 
Arab. What a wonder you make of it as if it were fo ſtrange a ſight 
in this Age to ſee a young Feliow in Drink. i 
Olind. Ia Drink! that is the le ſt of his Crimes; were that all. 
Ar. What monſtrous Eno: mityes has he been guilty of beſides? 
Olind. See you this? ( ſhews Letter) 

* or What f - | e 
lind. An aſſignation from Mrs. Pranellg to meet her this Morning in the 
Arab. Pray let me ſee it. 
Olind. Vie read it you — I could tear her peice meale, and yet can 
ſcarce forbear laughing at her folly (reads) m_ 


| My Dear, Dear, Wild Rogue. 
AI L not robe en the Piazza to morrow Morning at 
- 6--1 will ſteal out under pretence of coming to the 
8 £25! ' Mule, but my buſineſs will lye anather way in which I ſhall 
want an able Counſellor, Adien 4. K. 


3 
* 
i ' 
. 
: Li 
"7% 
U 

U 
N 
2 : 
54 
+ of 


— 4 
2 — 


— 
2 


98 —— 


* 
AE _— — 


"a> # FE. 4 a 7 * 
4 44. 1 4 2 * - C071 o 


M. Prunello- 
What 


. Py 4 
— 
— 


| are jor 1 JU 7 47 
What think you now — am not [like to have a ſpecial Spar of this I 
warrant he has more Intreagues among theſe filly women, then he can well 
turn to, 
Ar. You cenſure too ſeverely--ſhe that loves miſt endeavour to think as 
well of her Lover as ſhe can, for her own Quiets ſake, ls he to blame if ano- 
ther Mans wife will make kim an Appointment ? 


Olind. If he Anſwers it, he is. | | | 

Arab. Not atall-you wou“ d ſay he where rude indeed if he ſhou'd not 
give a diſtreſſed Lady a little Counſel _ " | 

Olind. When marry:d Women come to confer with ſich Lawyers, you 
5 may be ſure there's a fla in the Husbands Ty:le, The wife who goes abroad 
bed: for advice, will be ſure to bring home diſſention.--I ſhall never be reconcil*d 
* to him, pray Madam don't excuſe him--- | 
Arab, Vet he is taultleſs-- | 
Olixd, Tis well it he prove ſo--I am reſolved to try him-If I thought 
wou'd Sally, I wou'd allume Mrs Prunellos ſhape and intercept this Dear Dear 
wild Rogue (as ſhecails him) in his March. 
e Ara. That you may eaſuy do- your Size is very near hers. | 

Olind. I will have a fling at him then, But I ſwear, I do it more to diſappoint 
ber then any thing elſe. a 
7 Arab. Succeſs attend you [ Exter Dam J ſtay a minute tho*--are the 
W ritings ready? 


, - 


os 


— 
5 Daſh. According to your Order Madam, only I incerted one perticular in 
favout of myſelf | . 
5 Arab. That's not amiſs -Now Olinda you ſhall hear what care | have taken 
: of yu read what conc rns her and Mr W:ldiſh. 
3 Daſh Lreads . 1 T E M that he diii ver up to the ſaid John Wildiſh his Eſtate 
with as full power tareceit e the kents, and profits thereof as if 
Ca the full Age of 26, And alſo to give to hs belov'd Daughter 
5 - Olinda Scrapeall 5000 l. «pon Condition that ſhe marry the. 
ſaid Jahn W1ldiſh, | 


Ar. Are you (ure they are good in Law? IL 
74 Da ſu, Not the leaſt flaw I dare promiſe Madam they were drawn by Mr: 
! = Feaiou, the beſt Conveyancer in ENGLAND. he tells me there is not the 
3 leaſt Loop hole for hin to creep our at. | mew. ; 
YA Olind. I'm amaz'd--what means all this Gibberifh ? 
Az Arab. Ile unriddle it anoth r time. x 3-43 
7 Ol. ] amobliged to you Madam for the plentiful fortune you defign-. me 

more by half I dare ſwear then ever my Father do's while he lives. 
4 Arab. You ſee Lam no Nigeard. 
A Olind. Extremly bountiful- but I hope you excuſeme if l defer my thanks, 
for this Signal favour, till I ſee a fairer proſpect of it. ä 
4 ME... Yirtue is its own o Bens then reſerve them | 

e mult part now, but we ſhall meet again anon, 
het er 1 and:call upon Bellinda. 19 NHL 
And Ple to my Lover, (Ex. Amb.} 


EEE ˙— ˙» mmm, WHT ; 7 I. 4 EOS. EET 


* HA ATwefor JEALOUSITE. 


S CEN E. The Square in Covent Garden. | 
Enter Wildiſh. a 


F'Fld. I have contrived matters finely, ard fortune I'le ſay that for her i; 
alwayes ready to help me out at a dead lifr--no place to ſtumble into but my 
Uncles Campany- this is a iure way to make him kind to me. -If this poor 
Wench did not take mercy upon me ſometimes, | can't Imagine what wou'd 
become of my Garcaſs-- | ſhou d ſoon (hrink to the thin Dimenſions of an hun- 
gry Author--here comes one will break off my Meditations. 


Enter Olinda, 

Olind. ] do love this mad fellow, and am extreamly well pleas*'d to know 
he loves me--yet muſt 1 be a very Woman and diſſemble, 

Vid is her) Thou ere ſoft _ Rogue,--art thon come at laſt to an ex- 

Ing Lover? you fee [am ready to a upon Summons. 
Pe You are a punctual Lover. 
old. Here l am- you may communicate- come Child unfold what knotty 
difficulty is this thou wou dſt have me reſolve ? : 

Olind. Can you tell me an Expedient Sir to keep a man conſtant ? 

_ Wild. A damned Unlucky Queſtion that. (aſide) Age will do it, but hearkee 
Child theſe grave Queryes dont lye my way, what have you and 1 to do with 
conſtancy ?--will you walk? 

Olind. Whither good Haſty Sir? 

Wild. Any whither ſo we may be private don't love to give my advice in 
the Open Air--time is precious, and y ou throw it away as lightly as if it were 
nothing worth- here this way- pſbaw you are io backward. 

Olind. You are ſo forward--how long will this Violent heat laſt ? 
Mud. For ever--thy Beauty will maintain it. tis as impoſſible to be cold or 
indifferent under the influence of thoſe Eyes, as tis to freeze under the Line. 

. Olind, You men will prate. | 

Wild, And ſomething more in a proper place--prithee dear Creature dally 
no longer I am tired with expeQation--efry Minute is to me an Age, till I pay 
the Tribute that is due to Love and thee. --| will monid the in my Arms, and 
hug the to my Breaſt with ſuch hearty Zeal, that thou ſhalt own I am no 
common Devotee, | 3: 1.4 

. Ok Do you know after all, to-whom you have ſaid theſe fine things ? 

Wild. I hope fo, | | 

Ol. Are you ſure ont? | | 8 

Wild. S Death 1 have caught a Tartar- Im fallen into my Arch Enemyes 
heed Quarters, _ f93:077 1 $5 4 | 

Olin (unmaſquing ) now do you know / 8 

Wild. impudence be my refuge (aſide) know ! Lord that you ſhou'd think 


/ 


* 


to deceive a Lover with this thin diſguiſe.-I knew you the firſt moment, only I 
Heſign'd your Diver fion. rr oh aff Ol. 


ll, oo CD RE o_s 
= LT I » 9 38 4 wt; * k 
: | 7 


* 
3 


Ale for JEALOUSTE. 45 
OL, And you deſign d thoſe tender words, tho e cloſe Embraces, and amor- 


oo 
us gripings for me too no douht. 


A ild. Whom elſe could they be intended for? I have as many more at 
your Service -'Gad you ſhall ſee | wont come behind che belt of them in Rap» 
tuce--1can be plaguy loving if 1 ſer on*t--my Life! my Soul? | 
Ob | could lye for ever in theſe Arms, : 

Ryot in bliſs, and Surfeit on thy Charms, 
With vi lent pave in ex lied 3pirits move, 
In loſt in Rapture- - | ; 
5 Ol. Not {> furicus pray- I ſuppofe the Rhime is Love, · ti is flight I gueſs 
was meant for Mrs, Prunello if | had not come in your way firſt. 
* Wild. 'S Life ſhe has a vlaguy gueſs with her, how came (he to know of my 
Acquaintance there (aſide) Mrs. Prunc/lo) pray Madam who is ſhe ? 
Gi. You don't know. | 


filly Women! to trnſt their Reputation in ſuch Sparks Pockets. 

VVild. So, ſo, the Letter too, By what flight of hand was this convey'd 
to her (fide) I remember indeed I had ſuch a Letter ſent me- hut by Heavens 
I ne're thought on't ſi ce. — 

Ol. Upon what Ladyes Summons did you appear then Sir? 1 
n Wil. Hum-What Lady Madam? as if Idid not know 1 ſnou'd me:t you here. 
3 Ol. By inſtinct-I know you are in paiu to be gone, but Iwill keep you, if ic 
de but to diſappoint you doth- & ill nothing ferve your turn Sir, but hunting 
* in Incloſeures and Treſpaſung upon other Mens Properties? 


wd Not | by FE | 
* OL No Swearing if you wov'd be believed, do you know this Letter, Sir ? 


* 


Wild. Shall I Swear? 
Ot. No, becauſe you will be ſure to Lye: | 
- Wild. By your Fair ſelf, you alone employ my thoughts. 
OL. How ! Ss 
Wild. 1 long have Lov'd you with a real PaTion, but my unhappy Circum- 
ſtances were ſuch, as could not juſtifie my hold pretenſions; my Tongue has 
hitherto kept a Reſpectful flence, but my Eyes often ſpoke the Language of 
my Heart Oh that you had read it there, and fpar d me the confuſion of this 
Declaration. | on 193 22 | | 
; Ol. Tis made in 2 very ill rime«-no more of your falſe Paſſion, *will be Af- 
ronting. | h | | | 
ili Give me but the hearing Appearance indeed is againſt me, but 
Truth will ſoon clear my ſuſpected —— 82 L 0 
Ol. How apt are we to credit what we wiſh (fide Ytis not worth your whi-e 
hat's your Innocence to me you are at your o diſpoſal. Sir. 
ill. Now you Dog is your only time to Swear and Lye for your prefer- 
ment (aſide By Heaven at yours, and only yours--ſaſpett me not ſo meanly-- * 
injure not your on Charms ſs much bo heitere the Man, lig e tow'ring bopes 
have once lookt up to all that Heay'n of Beauty, could e re deſcend to any 
Lower Object? £6005my 59! οννẽ,Ex 1 hg eren 


A Cure for JEALOUSIE. 


*O 


Ol. The Varniſh Lyes too thick -theſe Fooleryes are more intollerable then 
your Crime——Ple no more of them. (Ex. Ol.) | 
- Wild. By Heay'n but you ſhall. (Ex. after her.) 


Enter Arabella and Bellinda Maskt, Blunt and Pimpwell after 'em. 


Fimy This muſt be the Lady Sir, by the deſcription her Maid gave me of 


ter Dreſs. 


Bl. Very well, leave me. 
Fimp. Take lu: k in you company however Sir, -- I have provided for my 


Muſter, and | think tis but reaſonable I ſnoud rake care 64 iny 11 rext-- Ile 
go and ſee what the Market affords, I am not curious, indifferent Fruit will 


ferve my turn. (Exit) 


Bell. Ha! the Stranger here.  (afide.) 
Ara, My Church Spark ſo early--I hope he has the Courage to peak tt to us 


(aſtae.) 

Bl Twiſh ! be right · J ſhou'd be very loth to Hunt upon a wrong: Scent, 

and purſue an old Paſs, when better Game is in View 2 ) fair duy to your 

Feauties Ladyes, you wou'd do well to bring, the Light and -your Faces ac- 
quainted. * 


Arab. You are very plain with us methinks Sir. 
Bl. I am a Souldier Madam, we love few words--ſhall I abe Jon one Queſti 


on, and be ſure of an Anſwer ? 
Arab. If it be civil · I can deny a Soaldier nothing · I am in Love with one. 
Bl. Pray Heaven I be the Man (ſide) Why ſo careful of your Faces, when 

there is no Sun ahroad to Damage them? t 4 
Bell Wou'd you have askt that Queſtion i in a Play Houſe? | 
Bluut, No -there you go to be private- here you come to take the Air. 
gell As much as you went to Flanders to Fight .- perhaps we are abroad 
upon the Plunder, and wou'd not be diſcovered. 
Bl. Then | muſt mike one in the party, - but firſt let me ſee my Comrades. 
Arab. No, no, . ty Praga not to 
Uahood your F Hawk till}you flye him. | : 
Bl. Why don't you Fly then then good Mrs, Hawk : 10 

Bell. Whether ſhe likes her Quarry or no. 

Blunt. Come, Come — — off with your Maks;, I have a great fancy | 


know you both. 
A ab. Therefore we'l keep em an- have a mind 20 wick en h an ol 


Acquaintance:  pGot tliw 
I lunt. Theſe Vizardsare damn'd uſeleſs troubleſome things, | 

Arab. No more then your Swords · tis ti ue we have no great: as for them, 
but Cuſtom has made em rr you provoke me to ĩt Probe ſee 
I always do execution. 

Blunt. Draw aſſoon as you pleaſe-- hal receive youlikea Solder. 

Bell. Roughl7 ba 40 3; 0 9 
Arab | have a jad to raiſe your imagination. O a4 
Ba. .Purpoſely to tanlk it. . | Jel. 


A Cure, for JEALOUSTE. Fr 


Bell. Cant you fancy Sir? FT 

Bl, No, Iam for fomething more ſolid then mere notion-- I am no 
Poet MAD AM. . ; kk 

Arab. I hope not for Poetry in Red is as abominable as Blafphemy in Back 
--but are n't you Artiſt enough to hit a face without ſeeing it ? 

Blunt. I can deſign you abundance of Peices with 00 Complexions, and 
regular features, but can't promiſe they ſhall be to the life. 
. ell. No mat ter if they pleaſe you as well. 
Kt Bl.1 may bz undeceived one time or other. and what a miſerableCaſe is that 
poor Lover in, whoſc Illuſtrious DULCINE A proves a freckled Country Drab. 
N Arab. At leaſt our Aa hide our de fects- you have anſwerꝰd your ſelf. 
* $ | | Emer Loveday. 
"Mx Loveday Ha! this is fortunate--at lenght I have found the villain, This place 
zs to pubſick to call him to account in Ile try to draw him afide--Sir a word 


. with you. (they whiſper) 
* Bl. Impertinent! (aſide.) Lou ſee l'm engaged. 
. Loveday, It ſnhanꝰt be long. 


Bl Anon l'le wait upon you. 

Loved. | muſt and wil! ſpeak with you now. tis a matter of concern, a buſh 
neſs on which both your life and mine depends 

Beil. My fears are ominous here is miſcheif towards . (aſide, 

BI: Thar's the Lady told you 1 was ſo deſperateiy in love with, to leave 
her now muſt eternally diſodli e her. | 

Loved. hat Lady then is a Whore--thev are both Whores to my knowledge 

B“: Faith That may be- I han t ſeen their faces--Pox on em if they be 
Whores Ex Loveday, & Blunt. 

Bell. | feara * * not how to prevert it. | 1 

Ar. Oui Mark indeed has left us very abruptly — was not rhat Lo 
who whiſpered him ? 5 1 * 

Bell. And tꝰother the Charming Stranger, each Drop ef whoſe bloud is 
dcarer to me then my own. | 

Arab. Here comes Wildiſh with Qlinda, diſpacth him after em 

. | &xter Wildiſh & Olinda. 

Zell. For Heav*as fake Sir, follow thoſe two Gentlemen, and prevent Blcud- 
ſhed—1 doubt they arejuſt going to cut anothers Throats honourably. 

Wild. This is only a ſtratagem of yours to get rid of me. | 

Arab. Tis realy as my Siſter tells jeu | 
- Olizd. Run Subject Icommand-you. . 

Wild, I fly Princeſs: - (Ex. i by IM 

Bel. Let us home, the apprehenſtons of my Souldiers danger and the diſmal 
effects this Quarrel may produce, fright me ſo, that I ſcarce know where Iam; 
— lt will be happy if Vidiſ be with them time enough to prevent their fury 
hut ſhou d either fall (which Heaven avert q my life would be a continu- 
ed Scene of diſquiet, there is no eaſe for me til ] know the Event. 

Olin. to Arabell Nor for me, till you explain that Miſterious Scrow! which 
Dafv. read to us this morning. Ha, oro ee 


2 
9 
_— 4 
| > 
. a + © 


* — 


— — — 


—_— 


Mr. . 
CI 4 * 
= 


82 A Cure fr FEAL OU SIE. 

Ar. As we walk you ſtall know al! tis time indeed we left this place 

unieſs we mean to be pickt up again. (Exeunt) 
Enter Blunt and Loveday. 

Bl. } begin to doubt this is meer envy of thine Loved =o ger m me away from 
the Women — your Mrs. has frown'd upon you, and you. are reſolv'd to 
revenge youc ſeif upon me hat means this ſuddain ſilence ? —— prithee 
diſpatch=1 long to be after them again. 

Loved. My buſineſs then in ſhort is this, Villain, drow. 

Bl. Short and pithy. 


Lovea, Draw, and defend your Life, or Ifle kill you as you deſerve ba ely. 
Bl. Love has certainly inſpir d you 


Loved. Thus to revenge its I:juryes on a perfidious Traytor, 
31 That's but an ill return for ſervices like mine. | | 
-Loved, A juſt return for Villanyes like yours. 
Bl. Have a care how you p:ovoke me too far —frizndhips and Honours tye s 
will be too weak co hold me, if you continue thus injuriou:. 
Loved. Cowardice will, Cowards are always Knav*s, but can*t be friends. 
Bl. Ha! Coward —thai% home I can hold no longer, if thou wer't my 
Brother, thus would | vindicate my fame, and write ics tryumphs in thy Heart 


( They fich. Loveday i- a arm'd 
Now beg your Life 7 Fe R 


Lowed. was fo ill defended ——tis not worth keeping no, take th: 
forfeit, | ſcorn to beg of io diſhonourable an Enemy. 
Blut.Youknow I wont— there's your Sword It had been but fair and. 
rea:onable to let me know my Crime before you came to Extremityes— Sure 
Friendſhi ps Laws are not more rigorous than thoſe by which Male factors are 


tryed, no criminal was e re denden d unheard I doubt you are abus d. 
Loved. By you 
Zl. Never. 


Loved | deſerv'd it to truſt thy diſſembled kindneF:; when I knew how 
common *tis growa under the name of Friendſhip to becray — n thou haſt 


m_ * in my tendereſt part, robbd me of that which more then wy Life 
Lvallu' 


Bellinda falſe and thou only art the cauſe, | 
Give back my love, or take this hated life. | 

El. Aa, does the M. lady lye there (a had you but laid by paſſion, and 
plainly told me this at firſt—1 ſnou d haveundeceived you, without running 
into the uucertain dangers of a Quarrel-———By Heaven, and her I love 1 
fweur, I uever injured you in your Affection, but always fery*d your Intereſts 
Wit n my Own. ; 


Loves. Falſe, you may ſpare your needleſs Proteſtation and perjurys th has 
her ſelfe confeſt it to me ſhe: own'd i. 


El. Then to convince 200 t rer meter. affur'd 1 
never can. * 


Loved. Falſe ſtill- 1 oy we i ad watt ds 5 


* 


„  »+ 8 lam her Brother. We #29 54 v2 14" Bank 


4 Cure for JTEALOUSTE. 53 

Loved. All falſe-- ſhe never had but one, and thou know*®:t ke is dead. 
ö Bl. Is it poſſible this patch and a few years abſence, ſhou'd ſo change each 
N Line ament and alter every feature ?- Now view me well, and ſee if you can 
= yer deſcry any rememembra ce of one whoever was your friend. 

Loved. By all my Joys cis he ! --- my 1riend ! --- Shame and amazement 
quite confound. me---can you n_ the raſh effects of a too Violent paſſion? 

Bl. Let this ſpeak for me. (while they embrace enter W- ildiſh. 

Wild. told, for heavens ſake hold, are you both mad ? 
Loved Oh do not interrupt me. 5 44? 0 £ 
Wild I ask your pardon Gent. for my Ignorance in the mode, I did not 
know 'twas the faſhion to Complement with drawn Swords. | 

Loved. Oh Wildiſh, my joy is fo great it riſes above Expreſſion? I thought 
to haue met an Enemy here, but have found a long loſt friend of ours ſee here 
our old Acquaintance honeſt rant Thrivewel ! | 

Wild. Unexpected Þ Frank Ihritenell! 

Bl. A live, at your Service Jack. | 
.. Welcome from £L1ZIU 14 Frank, littie did I think we ſhou'd ever 


have drunk Claret together again, I imagiu d you where tipling Nectar with 
our friends overhead long egoe. 


Bl, The fame ck u ilaiſh ſtill. J 
> Wila. m afraid Cid. your Regiment is broke. | 
"CO Bl. I hope not---I «m no titular Coll. Sack --- To tell you all the Eabyrinths 
fortune led me thro}, before I reacth'd this height were tedious---In ſhore 
- ſerv& it firſt as a Cadet, till time and favour raid me to the command of a 4 
Reg ment. | | 
Loved, Whence was the Report of your Death ? | £28 
Bl. I gave it out at my landing purpoſely to ſound my Fathers Temper, ha 
he been unconcern'd, I ſtill had wore this ſhape, and the Borrow'd name of + 
BLUN T---But fince I find him o chang'd I will lay both aſi de at his feet. 
Loved Haſte then and chear him with the joyful News. 
Wild. This will be a Reviving Cordial after (> large a Draught of * 
5. CEN E, Sr. Johns Houſe. x 
Enter Arab. Bell, Olind. | 
Ar. Now does your good Father ſuppoſe me murthered long ere this. 
Bell. | fear a real Murther, | n 
0 His Villany is monſtrous---1 bluſh to think he is my Father, yet l. ſee na 
likelyhood of getting the mon:y of lim you propos d··OH © + 
Arab, Hear the Contrivance, then judge of its ſueceſs I ordered Bereydreſt 
in White, her Breaſt Bloody, and a Dagger in her hand to place herſelf about 


the time he fuppoſed the Murther to he committed at his Study door. 
Ol. So far tis well. wget» aol S We = 


Ar The Ghaftlineſs of thisſight--his natural timorouſneſt, withthe terrors: - 
of a Guilty Coſcience(ſuppoſing it tobe my Ghoſt)will work him to ay. thiog 18 
ound. Any th gg but to part with his money. „ 


—_— 


2 —_ 


y = 
n 
9 
—— 
Ts 


* 
w—_— —— —_— 
— „ 1 gi \ 1 EE 


* 


reer 


54 4A Cure fr JTEALOUSIE. 

Ar. If: this fails, fear of hanging will -- Oh, here comes Daſh. now we 
fkall know all (Enter Daſh.) well, how have matters fucceeded---did our 
project take effect? . 

4" Daſh. Leyond Expectation Madam. 
4 Bell. Give us arclation oi the Adventure. 3 | 
4 - Daſh. Betty took her ſtanding at the timeappointed, and my Maſter come- 
18 ing according to cuſtom to his Study. {aw her by the uncertain light of day 
; | brake--- which added ſa much terror to the ſuppoſed Apparition, that 1 who 
\þ knew the trick was ſurpriſed--- | X 
Olin. long to know the Concluſion. | 
Dafh He was ſo ſoundly frighted at this, that he fell down ſpeechleſs, with- 
F ont any appcarance of life, and had not I catch*d him, had broke bis Neck 
de n Stairs=we brought him to ſpeak in a little time, but he Anſwers no 
body — only cryes out at certain Intervall's, Devil ſtand off, — I am not 
yet ready to d ye, Oh do not take my unprepared Soul—take all I have, 
give me but leiſure to repent—1 took the hint, ſlipt his keys out of his pocket 
went to his Study and took this Box, which contains the Writings of Ar. 
FF ild:ſd his Eſtate, beſides Bonds and Mortgages to the Value of Ten Thou- 
fand Founds, | 
| li , This indeed is beyond ExpeCtition, you deſerve your Reward, and 
6 Mall have it, but you had beſt ſtep home again and watch hi, motions( Ex. Dab. 
'' _ Now Olinda. | | | | 
Feil. Did not fear like a dead Weight lye heavy on my heart, and depreſs 
my Spirits — 1 ſhould rcjoyce to ſee your plot ſucceed fo weil, 
Ax. Never diſturb your ſelfe with the dread of what may be—— hope the 
deſt ſce they are here 
L Enter Sir John. Co. Blunt, Loveday, «nd Wildiſh. 
Beil. Here indeed f how my heart leaps for ]-y. : "This 
Sir John. This Change is ſo unexpected, to wondrous I know not how. to 
receive it, nor to expreſs the pleaſure which your ſafety gives me —— my 
heart ſo long oppreſs d with Sorrow, links bene: th this mighty load Sure 
Joy will finiſh what Grief. but began. | : 
Coll, Can you forgive me Sir. (Loved. & Wildiſh tx to the Women. 
Sir Fehn. Can ſt thou ask of me Fergiveneſs, who have been in all the fault, come to 
my Arms and be for ever fixt there; long haſt thou been abſent thence, from my Heart 
never. -O my Son accept theſe unfeigned Careſſes of an o're + and repenting Fa- 


ther, as a ſmall amends for what miſtaken Love has made thee ſuffer. 2 25 
Co. I deſerve not theſe Endearments--this tenderneſs, one Minuteskindnes is a re- 
compence too large for all that is paſt. 5 
dir Sohn. J have been vaſtly in thy Debr, but now 1 will diſcharge the great Account 
A,. this is Wonderful! 3 * 
ne. Oar Brothers ſay yen. | | | 
Sit Fehn. My Daughters here! O Children the Scen: is ſhifted fince laſt youſaw your 
Weeping Farher--yor r Brother Nes O pleaſing Sound! be lives to be the Joy and 
"Y Con. fort of my declining Years -my Ages ſupport--receive him not only as a long la- 
4 mented Brother, but as the Darling of your Fathers Soul. - - 181+ — 
C Coll. (ir John) Who is that Lady ? (pointing to Ara.) )))) 


® 


li 


2 4 q 


ure for JC 2 


Sir Fobn, Your Siſter Child, who liv'd with your Aunt in the Countrey. 
Col. Hum. my Sifter--there's a days Love, and pains threwn away. (aſide.) 
Sir John. Be this day dedicated to Mirth, and pleaſure- you are all my Gueſts Mu- 

e is wanting - methinks I grow young again and could lead you all a Dance my 
ul m 44 Les Legs keep true time with my Heart without there · (Enter Servants) 
call in your 8 all ſha _—_— of this days general Joy; Let Sorrow be a ftran. 
ger among us--here's that will make you Jovial-- _— Rejoycing be loud--ſo loud 
that all whS-p s by, may enquire and know the caule, - 

Ser. A Bleſſed Change this--Heayv'n grant it may continue, we have had a doleful 
Houſs a long time. 

Arab. Hefe Mr. VVi{diſh, you muſt rejoyce too. 5 1 5 Bax) 

Vn. What's here to make me ſo merry, pray M 

Ara. Nothing but the Writings of your Eſtate. 

iid. My Eſtate! This is a day of Wonders * am more amaz d then ever. * 
Uncle dead · or how-- > ” 

Ara. No Queſtions now -another time you may be fri, 
Nd. My thanks. 
Arab. Are Daſh his due ie -be was chiefly Inſtrumental, | | 
= He hall not find me ungrareful, now Madam,give me leave to Dk you an 
of my Eftace and Heart. 
—_ wichout t other if you pleaſe. Sip. an Eſtate with ſo great an lsenmbrance 
is dd Extraordinary Preſent, 

id. You are coo Cruel, 

Ar: Come Ofinds, the Game is almoſt dae buy the ne 
your Inclinatiaus. ( Aſide to her.) 

Olind. He does t. nor ſhan t yet- Ile keep him ſhort a little while,that he may have- 
aa better Appetite; en he comes to it jhe who firs down to Table with a full Stomacty:. | 
caa never make a. good Meale. i» (aſide) g 

„ Bl. (Ie Bell.) What I once Begg d as a Stranger, I now. Petition as a Brother. 


Bell. My former Guilty Wiſhes cover me with Bluſbes, and ſtop my Words: (aſi 4) 

Blunt. I hope you'l give my n no cauſe of Grief, when all elſe Rejoy 
dear Siſter ir muſt 

Sir John. It ſhall-— be. ir whar ir will——your Brother has ſaid 2— pon doe 
not me—— if you deny.him any thing. 

2775 I only beg — — al = be unhappy, whih I ceaſe to be ſo.” 

ir Fs, Come Brilinda, e uthority I Farker, and eas you Ee 
Bel. [ am all Obedience Sir.) K A 


Sir Jan. Kindly ſaid, my Bleſſing on thee for t—-Sr le is yours, and may yok 


gf) 


be happ appy in a Mutual Love. " 
My whole life ſhall ſpeak the. Acceptance of this Gif. 

Oli. Ile chin ont. 

Mid. You had better let that alone, tis 2 | Accidents. 
Fil. It ever — þ. Y 

o. Enough of that already, you muſt ev'n ſtay till I am in a humour. 
me. (co Arab.) 
Ol. Tis in vain, 


a. Well Madam, muſt you and I pair too ? | 0 : 

Ol. Are 1% afraid — in the 

e — do all * by the humour Thee (ald) — 1 
Ar. You maſt he = 


3 ry 


EDO --- ls, gt "'EALOUWU 
* I 8 T Lenin in Dub 7 + 


X Ws 
. : 3 So ty 
= Þdorthen my — ay before I dye. 


e ene 1 find 1 an very weaks yer woull een it: 
wet a You are weicome Son 1 2a to partake of our Mirth, "Frank, lives, and 
11" as urn *% 
Sc Lam glad of ir Six Rol heartily glad, but alas ir I an going, lam going, 
— Fir Jahn. Whether Man* 
e fFToreſt Sir, co mx long home, I am not a Mau for this woa. "Po 
_ Sir Fol, Hou Icok hearty and well. . 
. . A ay. the Canker is within that deſtroys me; Who's that, S Nephew 3 
| % Fo icher, I have not us'd thee a8 1 ought, but my Death will make thee amends, 
60, I hope vou ere not in earteſt Sir. 
eren My D-u ghter roc-.chen my Face ner dir Jeln, Ile beg the e 
ot you to — Care of the poor Girl, I fralf leave her a ſmall Pittance, ſhe and 4 
"= .* - tobe manag'd according royour Diſcretion, 
Coll. e Arab. and Bell) Ile do it I am ſorry for my SRtersLofs Sr. (wo Scrap. 
* Wn "Serap! Alack. alack, Sir.-ſbe FRA 1D 


* * Elbow o—— x 4 ' otras 70 
12 Scrap. Ha--(ave me, ; make) | | ik, 7 910 
* * 4: es, From wh ar: 
* * Ser. A Ghoſt, a Ghoſt, O Dear faves honey Wife are we, 22 1 did per 
= matther ther got I, Daſb knows twas none of I, 229 


9 r No veto upbraid your I nkindneſs Bur L forgive all, Diſmiſs our 4 
— rn to rhink that ſhe who is — 4 virtuous, can neither ve W erde | 


, 
3” 


. 
* 


2 May I hope a eng from your den-. will makeall my Le happy? 
Fs. * Sorts An opus "Thr dem hee any thin . IT,” fog "4 


| a | 
We +. - Won. meer roy eee iether freely, Moc pond wage * — * for A 


* 74 that. my Daugher. Ie you my Dear I Cham 
* * ©, aud henceforth be read) to 05, 10 wh World, that . 
wo 5 l Feller are feldem juſt I» . 
. * 2 Bur a. abe foich/ul wut. e 8 
* 2 = This ad, win Satixfadtion, Providence has bern era within | 
=_ alls to day, in grateful comniemorarion'of whichy ir always ſhall be ny g 
= bp Samy” Mary ear” cage ata nts TI or 
r . | 
is * Never 204 if things & what they W % 
WS * But wait wit porn wie 2 . 1 
— deen! 42 . 1 
WE. di ber more 3 what T had byft. 74 
* . 
n 8 i T4664 11 8. . 
BW OY icy ASL N 1 = 1 
5 7 a. nen, 2 


N PP 
M 2 eee eee ;
