Requested Title: A SHOEMAKER A GENT
Authors: William Rowley
Matched Alias: A Shoomaker, a Gentleman
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: cu31924013134121
Source Title: All's lost by lust, and A shoemaker, a gentleman
Source Author: Rowley, William, 1585?-1642?
Source Date: 1910
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/cu31924013134121_djvu.txt
Notes: Curated salvage from an Internet Archive Rowley volume containing All's Lost by Lust and A Shoomaker, a Gentleman; extraction is bounded from the printed second-play title to its closing FINIS.

---
A  SHOO-MAKER, 
A  GENTLEMAN. 

Act  I.     [Scene  i.] 

[A  Field  of  Battle  in  Britain.] 

Enter  Allured  "Wounded,  Elred,  Offa  and  the  Queene. 

Alarum. 

King.     Away,  stand  off,  prop  not  a  falling  Castle 
With  your  weake  strength,  tis  sinfull  Charity, 
And  desperate  folly  to  meet  a  mischiefe. 
Whose  entertainment  is  assur'd  destruction: 
Leave  me  I  pray  savegard  your  owne  lives.  5 

Queen.    Oh  Royall  Sir,  tis  you  that  doe  dispaire. 
Wounds  are  not  alwaies  mortall. 

Ellred.    Deare  sir  let  them  be  drest : 

King.    You  tire  me  out  of  breath  with  vaine  delaies. 
As  well  may  you  give  life  unto  a  stone, 

A  sencelesse  statue;  my  lifes  but  lent  10 

To  bid  you  shun  your  deaths,  and  in  that  too 
Heavens  mercy  is  miraculous,  yet  you  will  not  heare  me : 
Agen  I  charge  you  as  a  King ;  yet  none  regards 
Declining  Majesty;  then  as  a  husband. 
And  a  Father  hear;^  dost  thou  love  me?  15 

Quee.    Approve  it  in  my  death,  if  thou  mistrust  it  Allured. 

King.    Have  you  duty,  you  Phaenix  of  my  age. 
For  though  two  persons  be  distinguishable. 
Yet  ought  there  be  but  one  combined  heart 
In  your  fraternall  union,  your  Icnees  promise.  20 

Both.    Our  duties  are  much  lower. 

King.    Then  here  I  charge  yee  for  to  leave  the  Field, 

Texts,  "here." 

(169) 


170  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Fly  from  death,  hee's  now  in  pursuite  of  yee: 
Fly  from  the  Tyrant,  for  this  unhappy  day 
25  Those  bloody  Persecutors  Maximinus,  and  Dioclesian, 
Display  their  by-neckt^  Eagle  over  Brittaine, 
While  she  lyes  under  as  a  bleeding  prey, 
One  Talent  here  is  fastned.   [Laying  his  hand  on  his  hreast.'\ 

Enter  Amphiabell,  and  Sir  Hugh. 

Hugh.    Fly  Noble  Princes, 
Wee  have  stood  out  the  utmost  of  the  day, 

30  Till  hope  had  lost  his  anchorage,  therefore  fly, 
And  seeke  some  other  day  for  victory. 
Amphi.    How  fares  the  King? 
Al.    Ene  on*  the  Virge  of  Blisse, 
O  deare  Amphiabell.    Noble  Sir  Hugh, 
What  more  could  I  have  wisht,  then  breath  to  thanke 

35  Your  kind  assistance  in  this  haplesse  day : 
Oh  take  an  equall  joynter^  with  my  Sonnes, 
From  this  cold  Oracle  all  I  bequeath 
Is  Counsell  for  your  safety,  fly  the  slaughter, 
For  dying  men  are  halfe  Propheticall, 

40  If  you  abide  a  long  stay  you  fall : 

Oh  doe  not  make  me  guilty  of  your  deaths 
That  drew  you  hither  to  expire  your  breaths, 
This  path  I  progresse  but  avoyde  my  way. 
You  neede  not  haste  to  an  assured  danger : 

45  Farewell  my  love,  my  blessing  here  shall  fall, 
Performe  my  will,  else  Fate  avert  it  all : 
Thou  canst  not  boast  grim  death :  I  did  not  yeeld. 
Nor  fell  by  Agues,  but  like  a  King  ith'  field.     [Dies.] 
Quee.    Aye  mee  distressed  Queene. 

'Texts,  no  hyphen. 

'Texts,  "one."    This  correction  is  elsewhere  made  silently. 

"Texts,  "jonyter." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  171 

Amphi.    Your  grief e's  incurable, 
Remember  the  will  of  your  dead  Lord,  and  be  50 

A  good  Executrix,  fly  from  persuing  danger : 
And  you  Royall  youths  must  seeke  some  shelter 
To  secure  your  lives ;  away,  tis  all  our  Fates. 

El.    I  could  better  dye  on  him  that  slew  my  Father. 

Offa.    Take  my  company  in  that,  deare  Brother.  55 

Qu.     So  make  a  Mother  prove  unnaturall, 
I  will  defend  the  foe,  through  this  breast 
You  passe  unto  him,  have  yee  forgot  your  Father? 

El.    No,  wee'l  reveng  his  death : 

Quee.    And  kill  your  Mother  first. 

Hugh.    What  thinke  yee  Princes,  that  we  left  behind  60 

The  smallest  attome  of  a  seeming  hope, 
When  wee  forsooke  the  field,  youle  not  thinke  so? 

El.     Whats  your  Counsell? 

Am.     Takfe  on  some  course  disguise,  what  poverty  is't'' 
But  will  be  rich,  being  your  lives  protection.  65 

Offa.    Instruct  and  ayde  us  some  superior  power. 
Which  dost  behold  our  forc'd  necessity. 

El.    Brother,  it  shall  be  thus ;  some  poore  Souldier 
Slaine  in  the  battaile  will  we  change  habits  with : 
So  it  may  be  thought  that  wee  are  slaine,  70 

And  stay  the  bloody  Inquisition. 

Offa.    Tis  well  advis'd,  weele  not  assay  to  mend  it: 
This  effected  Mother,  weele  come  and  take  our  leaves. 

El.    What  for  your  selfe  Madam  ? 

Qu.    Here  will  I  stay, 
Untill  my  eyes  like  briny  Pyoners  75 

With  their  continuall  Cadence,  have  digg'd  up 
A  woefull  Sepulcher,  for  this''  sweet  Corps ; 
And  if  these  sterrill  Founts  prove  weake,  and  dry. 
Here  will  I  kneele  till  death  has  cloyd  his  Gorge, 

Texts,  no  apostrophe. 
'Texts,  "these." 


172  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

80  And  left  the  putrifaction,  the  mortall  dampe 
Shall  kisse  me  to  his  company  for  ever. 

Am.    Oh  Madam,  these  are  but  fruitlesse  apprehensions, 
And  savoureth  not  of  that  discreet  vertue 
Hath  beene  ever  in  you :  your  story  hath  been  fild 
85  With  Temperance,  Care,  and  Patience,  and  all  these  forbid 
This  barren  Sacrifice,  loose  not  your  selfe 
In  the  great  losse  of  your  deare  Husband. 

Hugh.     Madam, 
If  you  dare  trust  your  person  to  my  protection, 
I  will  Conduct  you  safe  into  North  Wales, 
90  Where  Powes  my  Lord,  and  Father,  yet  maintaines 
A  petty  Royalty:   Thither  if  please  you  wend, 
Weele  either  keepe  or  loose  our  selves  with  you. 
Am.    Alas  Sir  Hugh,  little  can  you  promise 
Of  safety  there,  for  from  faire  Winifred, 
95  The  onely  Daughter,  and  Heire  to  Dun-wallis, 
I  have  receiv'd  too  true  intelligence ; 
The  Barbarous  Romans  have  supplanted  peace. 
Putting  to  sword,  and  torture  all,  that  beare 
The  name  of  Christians :  Nay,  even  the  right 
100  Amphiabell  did  hold  is  now  so  ruinate, 
I  have  not  left  one  Subject  to  command. 

Hugh.    Heard  you  this  from  vertuous  Winifred  ? 
Am.    Much  more  of  woe,  the  vertuous  Maid  her  selfe 
Hath  left  off  State,  forsaken  Royalty, 
105  And  keepes  a  Court  so  solitary,  as  it  seemes 
More  like  a  Cloyster,  then  a  Royall  Pallace. 

Within  a  cry,  follow,  follow. 
Harke,  our  enemies  persue  us,  if  we  stay 
Wee  must  resolve  for  death. 

Hugh.    Madam,  either  injoyne  us  for  your  safe  Conduct 
no  Along  with  us,  or  heere  defend  your  life 
To  the  last  breath  ? 

Qu.    Neither  I  beseech  you  gentlemen, 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  173 

Will  yee  accept  a  poore  widdowes  thankes, 

For  all  your  loves,  tis  a  thin  gratitude ; 

But  tis  all  I  have ;  I  beseech  yee  haste  away, 

If  you  doe  other,  He  not  thanke  you  for't.  1 1 5 

For  here  He  stay,  and  warme  this  cold  remainder, 

Vntill  some  fiend,  sent  from  the  infernall  pit, 

Doth  seperate  by  force,  what  Heaven  hath  knit. 

Hugh.    Then  to  the  best  protection  of  the  Heavens, 
Wee  leave  you  to  be  comforted.     Exit  [with  Atnphiabell].  120 

Qu.    That  shelter  cover  you. 

Enter  Elred,^  and  Off  a. 

El.    Come  deare  Brother 
These  poore  habilliments  may  find  surer  footing, 
Than  the  rich  Robes  which  Royalty  is  clad  in : 
If  they  doe,  weele  blesse  the  happy  Transformation. 
Mother,  your  blessing;  nothing  else  wee  want  125 

To  further  the  issue  of  our  unknowne  fate.' 

Qu.    Take  it,  O  take  it  in  an  houre  of  sorrow. 
But  leave  that  all  with  me. 
So  you  have  all  I  can  bestow  upon  you : 

But  mentally,  He  still  be  blessing  of  you,  130 

And  never  cease.     (Within:  follow,  follow.^°)     Harke,  tis 

time  you'r  gone. 
Away ;  I  charge  yee  on  your  duties. 

Off  a.    But  wheres  your  owne  safety  ? 

Qu.    Leave  me,  and  haste  you  hence  I  say. 
He  take  my  blessing  off  if  you  delay,  I35 

And  plant  my  curse  instead ;  Elred,  and  Offa, 
You'r  my  Sonnes,  I  charge  you  to  obey  me. 

•Texts,  "Eldred."  In  this  scene  the  text  has  both  Elr.  and  Eld. 
before  Elred's  speeches.  Eldred  is  also  regularly  written  through  the 
rest  of  the  scene. 

"Texts  have  a  comma  here. 

"■Texts,  "follow,  within  [and  below]  follow.'' 


174  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

El.    Elred  and  Offa  are  already  gone, 
For  with  our  habits  we  have  chang'd  our  names, 
140  When  such  you  heare  of,  oh  let  your  prayers  still  blesse  them, 
With  happy  memory. 

Qu.    He  never  part  with  that  remembrance : 
Obey  me  and  bee  gone. 

Offa.    With  constant  hope, 
That  though  vaild  honor  beare  an  Ecliptick  staine, 
145  Our  sunne  will  passe  it,  and  shine  bright  againe 

Exit  [with  Elred]. 
Qu.    So,  now  come  you  Tyrants,  here  you  shall  find  me 
Praying  for  curses  on  your  cruelty. 

A  Flourish.   Enter  Maxiininus,  Dioclesian,  Leodice,  Alhon, 
BassianuSj  and  Rutullus,  [with  soldiers'] . 

Max.    Now  equal  Csesar,  brave  Dioclesian, 

The  day's^^  at  leasure  to  returne  thee  thanks 
150  For  ayding  Maximinus  in  these  warres, 

In  happy  time  thy  succour  came  from  France, 

To  make  us  Conquerors  of  Brittaine,  which  else  might  yet 

Have  beene  a  doubtfull  day :  when  thou  want'st  ayde, 

Bid  Maximinus  come  with  this  joynt  force, 
155  Weele  make  the  world  our  owne. 

Dio.     Rome  shall  not  loose  its  name,  the  worlds  Com- 
mander, 

Till  this  knot  unties ;  perpetuall  be  it. 

Till  Rome  erects  our  golden  Statues, 

Plac'd  by  Saturne,  and  great  lupiter, 
160  And  there  be  deified,  to  blesse  all  those 

Which  may  succeed :  but  in  these  designes. 

Let  us  remember  high  deserving  Albon, 

Whose  valour  was  not  seconded  this  day 

By  any  single  Arme. 

"Texts,  "daies." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  175 

Max.    It  was  the  best, 
The  shout  and  full  applause  was  onely  Albons,  165 

For  which  unto  thy  Knighthood  late  given  in  Rome, 
We  adde  the  stewardship  of  Great  Brittaine 
Vnder  Maximinus,  and  Dioclesian: 
Goe  to  thy  Barony  of  Verrolam, 

Two  legions  there  shall  still  attend  on  thee,  17c 

To  quell  and  persecute  these  Christians : 
Who  will  not  stoope  unto  our  Roman  God, 
Shall  feele  the  stroake  of  our  revengfuU  Rod. 

Alb.     Albon  shall  still  as  substitute  to  Rome 
Observe,  and  keepe  her  high  imperiall  Doome.  175 

Max.    Bassianus,  be  you  Competitor  with  Lord  Albon, 
And  with  severity,  through  the  conquer'd  Cities  persue 
The  Christians  to  their  Martyrdomes :  .  .  .  Whose  that  ? 

Qu.    He  answer  for  my  selfe ;  Tyrant  a  Christian, 
A  husbandlesse  and  Childlesse  Christian,  180 

Yet  one  so  daring  unto  misery, 
She  throwes  a  Chalenge,  to  the  worst  thou  canst, 
Defiance  to  thee  thus;  [^Spits.]  Oh  were  it  poyson 
To  swell  this  tyrants  bosome  till  it  burst. 
And  fall  thus  low.  185 

Max.    Ha  ha  ha,  misery  makes  her  desperate, 
Thou  add'st  a  triumph  woman  to  our  state, 
To  brandish  forth  such  fruitlesse  Menaces ; 
To  Prison  with  her,  weele  thinke  of  further  torments : 
He  prostetute  thy  body  to  some  Slave,  190 

And  if  the  issue  prosper,  make  him  a  Hang-man. 

Qu.    And  such  another  may  thy  Daughter  have. 

Leo.    Choose  for  your  selfe  Lady,  I  have  an  eye  to  pleas- 
ure myself  e.^^ 

Max.  Weele  hold  not  dispute  with  women,  away  with  her  : 
Rochester  Castle  shall  be  your  pallace;^^  you'r  like  jg^ 

"Texts  have  a  question  mark  here. 


176  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

To  keepe  a  hard  House  on't. 
Qu.    Like  the  Court  thou  keepst. 
Max.    No  more  words,  away  with  her. 
Qu.    My  words  He  better  spend  in  Prayers  to  Heaven, 
But  if  I  chance  to  Curse,  He  thinke  on  thee : 
200  [Aside.]      My  Royall   Plants,   Heaven  guard   from  their 
full  gripe, 
Fall  Fate  on  me,  my  time  and  dayes  are  ripe.  Exit  [guarded] . 

Dio.    Oh  Brother  Caesar,  in  this  Brittish  calme 
Weele  pas  agen  over  to  stormy  France, 
The  Gothes,  and  Vandalls  have  out  past  the  bounds, 
205  And  o're  the  Rhine  past  into  Burgundy, 
Our  worke  must  be  to  reverberate, 
And  drive  them  to  Confined  Germany, 
While  you  persever,  with  an  awfuU  hand. 
To  keepe  our  conquer'd  foes  beneath  your  feet  ; 
210  Give  not  those  frighted  Welch-men  time  to  breath : 
But  if  agen  you  doubt  of  what  you  can. 
You  know  your  friend  cald  Dioclesian? 

Max.    Your  words  are  mine  if  you  have  need  in  France, 
Weele  Feast,  and  bring  you  to  the  Brittish  shore, 
215  Then  part  unto  our  worke.     Our  Daughter  Leodice, 
Weele  leave  to  keep  her  court  at  Canterbury, 
Rutullus,  take  it  to  your  charge,  to  see  erected 
On  the  conspicuous  promonts  of  our  Land, 
Beacons,  which  may  stand  in  ken  of  other, 
220  By  whose  suddaine  fiers  on  the  least  invasion. 
We  may  be  cald  to  Armes. 
Rut.    It  shall  be  done. 
Dio.     A  carefuU  Policy,  bee  my  Tutor 
To  teach  me  Military  Discipline, 
Fly  Brason  Oratrix,  all  lingued  fame, 
225  And  tell  at  Rome  of  Maximinus  name : 
Say  Dioclesian  too  will  bring  a  Crowne, 
To  bind  thy  seven  fold  Head  with  high  Renowne.   Flourish. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  177 

Say  like  to  loves,  when  our  Dread  Thunders  hurl'd, 

Our  sable  Eagle  strikes  through  all  the  world.  Exeunt  omn. 

[Act  I.     Scene  2.  J 

Enter  discovered  in  a  Shop,  a  Shoo-maker,  his  Wife  Spin- 
ning, Barnaby,  two  lourninien. 

Shoo.  Good  boyes,  fine  knaves,  yerke  it  home,  good  ware 
will  away,  when  bad  lyes  dead  on  our  hands,  there's  no 
thrift  in  that;  spin  a  faire  thread  Sisly,  let  not  my  journi- 
men  want,  the  Warres  has  lam'd  many  of  my  old  Custom- 
ers, they  cannot  goe  a  hie  lone,  bad  world  for  us,  but  a  wet  5 
winter,  will  weare  out  Shoo-leather,  and  make  amends, 
weele  cut  it  out  if  it  doe  Boyes? 

Bar.  Your  journimen  shall  mount  then  Master,  for  my 
foots  in  the  Stirrop  already,  ply  your  worke  Mistresse,  we 
alwaies  bring  your  labours  to  good  ends  He  warant  yee.       10 

Sis.  Why  Barnaby,  thou  seest  I  am  at  defiance  with  my 
worke  till  it  be  done,  for  I  am  alwaies  spitting  on  my  toe. 

Shoo.  Good  wench  Sisly,  there  shall  no  Cornes  grow  on 
thy  toes  for  that,  thy  shooes  shall  be  large  enough,  finely 
shalt  thou  goe,  and  tread  upon  Neates  Leather.  15 

Bar.    He  eate  the  feet  if  she  doe  Master ; 

Wife.    Eate  my  feet  goodman  knave? 

Shoo.    Misconstruction  Sis,  thou  mistakes  Barnaby,  heele 
eate  Neates  feet,  none  of  thine,  but  Beefe  shall  be  thy  foode 
boy,  as  good  as  the  Major  of  Feversham  cuts  on's  Tren-  20 
cher,  and  Drinke  as  strong  as  the  Statute  affords. 

Bar.  Statutes  are  strong,  Master,  therefore  we  should 
have  stronge  drinke :  I  had  rather  weare  Lace  by  the  Statute, 
than  drinke  if  it  be  small. 

Shoo.     Good  drinke  in  thy  throat  if  thou  speak'st  in  25 
earnest :  but  Ralph,  what  price  beares  Ballets  ?  no  Musicke 
in  Feversham? 


178  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Ralph.     Faith  sir  your  statute  Beere  has  taken  my  pipe 
a  hole  too  low,  it  cannot  reach  Ela. 
30      Shoo.  He  have  that  fault  mended  boy,  but  we  must  drink 
strong  drinke,  as  we  shew  our  Religion,  privately.     'Tis 
dangerous  to  be  good  Christians  now  a  dales. 

Bar.     I  am  afraide  there  will  be  to  many  Christians  sir, 
because  many  use  to  goe  a  Pilgrimage  Bare-foot ;  and  that's 
35  an  ill  wind  for  our  profit. 

Shoo.  No  more  talke  of  ill  winds  Bamaby,  weele  sing 
away  sorrow.  Strike  up  Ralph,  He  wash  thy  whistle  anon 
boy. 

Ralph.    Well  sir.  He  scoure  it  first  if  I  can  then,      Sings. 

Enter  Crispianus,  and  Crispinus.     [i.  e.,  Elred  and  Offa.] 

El.    Brother,  heer's  a  life  to  mocke  at  state, 
40  And  staine  her  surly  greatnesse :  who  would  venture 
To  walke  upon  the  Icy  path  of  Royalty, 
That  here  might  find  a  footing  so  secure : 
Heer's  harmony  indeed,  a  fearelesse  sport, 
A  joy  our  young  yeares  seld'^  has  [known]  at  Court. 
45      Offa.     I  Brother,  would  we  were  of  this  Fellowship. 
El.    Dost  thinke  we  could  forget  our  former  ease 
And  fall  to  labour? 
Offa.    Why  not? 
That  was  not  without  troubles  of  the  mind, 
And  methinkes  to  exchange  for  the  bodies  labour, 
50  Were  a  farre  freer  good ;  to  sing  with  homely  cheere, 
Were  sweeter  farre  then  to  feede  fat  with  feare. 

El.    Weele  put  it  then  in  practice,  heaven  grant 
We  may  find  entertainement : 

[to  the  shoemakers.]  good  speede  unto  your  labours  Gentle- 
men. 
55      Sho.     Gentlemen,  we  are  good  fellowes  no  Gent,  yet  if 

"^Texts,  comma  after  "seld". 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  179 

gentlenes   make   Gentility  we  are   Gentlemen:   My  pretty 
youths,  would  you  ought  with  us  you  speake  so  friendly? 

El.    No  more  then  we  shall  deserve  sir. 

Wife.    And  you  are  worthy  of  that  ifaith. 

El.    Sir,  wee  are  youths  whom  the  rough  hand  of  Warre  60 
Hath  ruin'd,  and  made  desolate,  our  friends 
And  meanes  are  parted  from  us,  our  friend's  in  Heaven, 
Our  meanes  within  the  gripe  of  enemies, 
Both  inaccessable.^*     Thus  much  we  are, 

Fatherlesse,  friendlesse;  succourlesse  and  forlorne,  65 

What  we  may  be,  lyes  yet  within  the  grant 
Of  some  kind  Master,  that  may  instruct  us  in 
Some  honest  Trade,  to  get  our  living  by. 

Shoo.    Pretty  spoken  youths  by  Saint  Anthony, 
How  dost  thou  like  them  Sisly  ?  70 

Wife.  Yes  truely  husband,  if  they  will  doe  as  well  as 
they  say,  I  like  'em  very  well ;  good  faces  as  faces  goes  now 
a  dayes,  prethee  sweet  heart  be  kind  to  'em,  and  entertain 
'em  if  they  like  our  Trade. 

Bar.     Oh  good  Master  entertaine  'em,  we  want  junior  75 
prentises  for  under  worke. 

Ralph.     Doe  sir,  keepe  good  faces  in  your  shop.^^ 
Twill  draw  the  Custome  of  pretty  wenches  the  better. 

Shoo.  House-keeping's  chargeable,  men  must  have  good 
meat.  80 

Wife.  They  will  worke  and  earne  their  meat  He  warrant 
yee. 

Shoo.    What  are  yee,  Bretheren? 

Both.     In  love  and  nature  sir,  the  neerest  Bretheren. 

Wife.    Tis  pitty  they  should  be  parted  then,  if  they  love  85 
so  well. 

Shoo.    Your  Names  ? 

"No  punctuation  or  capital  here. 
"Texts  have  a  question  mark. 


i8o  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Cris}^     Crispianus^®  mine. 
Crispi.    Mine  Crispinus. 
90      Shoo.    Good  names ;  good  names,  well  boyes  on  this  con- 
dition I  will  entertaine  you,  I  neede  not  doubt  your  truths, 
and  honesty,  you  have  such  faire  and  promising  out  sides : 
but  I  must  have  you  bound  for  seaven  yeares,  and  then  you 
are  your  owne  men,  and  a  good  trade  to  get  your  livings 
95  by. 

Both.    With  all  our  hearts, 
And  happy  are  we  in  your  kind  acceptance. 

Sho.  You  shall  be  mine,  then  give  'em  entertainment 
Bamaby. 
100  Bar.  New  Aprons  and  Capps  here,  for  a  Couple  of  Gent. 
So  on  with  your  Breast  plate,  this  Cap  makes  thee  a  gradu- 
ate, you  are  come  amongst  Bacularions,^^  beare  up  your 
heads  boyes,  weele  teach  yee  to  bristle,  wax  better  and  better, 
last  to  the  12,  then  set  foot  in  the  stirop  and  have  at  all. 
105  Shoo.  Shew  them  their  tooles,  and  give  them  entrance 
Barnaby. 

Enter  Rutullus  and  Soiddiers,  hearing  the  Queene  to  Prison. 

Qu.    Sir,  I  have  not  beene  us'd  to  this  hard  travell, 
If  you  dare  mittigate  your  Masters  Cruelty, 
And  let  me  rest  a  little,  ile  thanke  you  for  it. 
no      Rut.    Tis  not  in  our  Commission,  but  lie  dispence  a  little. 
Shoo.    Who  is  this  I  pray  sir? 

Rut.    The  Queene  going  to  Prison,  to  Rochester  Castle, 
Doe  you  not  know  her? 
Shoo.    Alacke,  alacke. 
115      Qu.      [aside.]      My  eyes  are  not  deceaved,  they  are  my 
Children. 

"Texts,  "Chris"  and  "Chrispianus."  We  should  expect  hereafter 
Cris.  to  indicate  Crispianus  but  in  the  scene  with  the  queen  Cri.  is 
obviously  used  for  each  in  succession. 

"Texts,  Bacularious. 


A  Shoo-niaker  a  Gentleman  i8i 

Cris}^     Tis  our  Mother  Offa,  take  heed  our  teares  do  not 
discover. 

Cri.    Pray  heaven  they  do  not,  I  fear  my  eyes 
Will  be  kind  traitors. 

Qu.    Dare  ye  be  so  kind, 
To  afford  a  distressed  woman  a  stoole  ? 

Wife.    I  dare  doe  that  Madam,  Crispinus,  reach  a  stoole.  120 

Qu.    On  thy  knee  Child,  why  dost  thou  kneele  to  me? 

Cri.    Tis  my  duty  Madam,  misery  hath  not  chang'd  your 
name, 
Tho  bated  of  your  power,  you  are  my  Queene  still. 

Qu.     Heaven  blesse  thee  for't,  \^aside.'\  I  have  stolne  thee 
a  blessing. 
[To  Crispiamis.]    Wouldst  thou  adde  something  too?  125 

Cri[spia].     I    would   bee   as    Dutifull    as   my   Brother, 
Madam. 

Qu.    Is  he  thy  Brother,  blessing  on  you  both : 
[Aside.]     This  was  a  happinesse  beyond  my  hope. 
That  I  should  once  more  blesse  my  Children  really, 
Keepe  in  thou  woman's  frailty,  grief e  Chayne  my  Tongue.     130 
Least  thou  betray  the  utmost  of  my  hopes. 
My  teares  may  find  excuse. 

Rut.    Why  weepes  those  boyes? 

Cris.    Alas  Sir,  'tis  oft  times  the  barren  fruits 
Of  subjects  loves,  when  they  behold  their  Prince ; 
But  much  more  will  the  Flux  of  sorrow  sir  135 

Abound,  when  they  behold  them  throwne  to  misery. 

Rut.    You're  very  kind. 

Wife.  Kind  boyes  they  are,  indeed  they  shall  fare  neare 
the  worse,  I  could  e'ne  weepe  my  selfe,  to  see  my  boyes  so 
kind  hearted.  140 

Rut.     Madam,  you  doe  but  trouble  'em,  and  win  some 
drops 
From  them,  that  they  would  spare  if  you  were  absent. 

^In  these   speeches   Cris.    should  mean   Crispianus.     See  previous 
note. 


i82  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Qii.     Tis  your  trouble  sir,  they  could  be  content 
With  this  kind  expence,  a  longer  sojourne,  but  you 
145  Instruct  me  well;  farewell,  I  can  but  thanke  yee. 
That's  all  I  have  to  give  for  your  kind  youths 
— [aside.]     What  will  my  tongue  doe,    [To  Dawe  Sisly.] 

pray  use  them  well, 
So  much  the  more  cause  they  were  kind  to  mee. 
Rut.    Madam  will  you  goe? 
Qu.     We  talke  of  no  stay, 
150  Let  not  your  hast  make  me  unthankfuU  pray. 
And  barre  my  thankes  for  kindnesse. 
But  I  have  done :   On  to  my  house  of  woe. 
Yet  since  we  must,  delay  the  more  annoyes. 
This  comfort^^  yet  heaven  to  my  sorrowes  gives, 
155  In  midst  of  Tyranny  my  children  lives. 

Exit  [with  Rutullus  and  soldiers]. 
Wife.     The  world  treads  not  upright,  methinkes  it  had 
neede  of  a  good  workeman  to  mend  it. 

She.  Peace  Sisly,  no  problems,  no  figures,  no  womans 
Rhetorick,  the  tongue  may  undoe  the  whole  body,  Tausume, 
160  there  is  Greeke  for  yee  wife,  let  us  keepe  good  consciences 
with  in  doores  how  ere  the  wind  blowes  abroad,  tis  honester 
deceite  to  seeme  bad  and  be  good,  than  to  seeme  pure  and  be 
a  knave,  goe  too,  good  soles  will  carry  out  bad  upper  leath- 
ers, tis  a  bad  time  I  can  tell  yee,  but  why  were  my  boyes  so 
165  passionate,  to  weepe  at  the  Queenes  distresse. 

Cris.    Alas  sir,  who  could  chuse,  passion  me  thought 
Did  make  me  apprehend  strange  fantasies, 
I  made  the  case  mine  owne,  suppos'd  my  Mother 
Had  bin  hal'd  to  Prison;  some  would  have  pittyed  her, 
170  Though  but  a  meane  woman,  much  more  at  such  a  Sover- 
aignes  fall. 
Cri.    I  Brother,  and  suppose  her  Sonnes,  though  Royall, 
had  seene 

"Texts  punctuate  "annoyes  this  comfort,". 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  183 

Our  mother  as  we  saw  her,  in  Princely  compassion 
Perhaps  they  would  have  done  the  like. 

Cris.    No  doubt, 
Nay  Master  without  offence,  it  was  your  fault  too. 
For  in  your  eye  I  spide  a  pearle  of  pitty.  17 1 

Shoo.  Good  faith  thou  sayst  true,  I  could  doe  no  lesse, 
neither  doe  I  discommend  yee  for  it,  tis  a  good  bosom  where 
mercy  dwells. 

Wife.     I,  their  Compassion  of  women  shall  loose  'em 
nothing,  if  they  be  but  dutifull  to  their  Master,  and  just  to  180 
their  Dame. 

Shoa.    Enough  of  Ceremony:  Whats  a  clocke  Barnaby? 

Bar.  The  chimes  of  my  belly  has  gone,  it  should  be  past 
twelve. 

Shoo.  Provide  dinner  Sis,  Master,  journimen,  and  185 
Prentises,  one  Table  serves  for  all ;  wee  feed  as  all  fellowes ; 
shut  up  shop,  this  is  afternoone's  holy-day  in  honour  of  my 
two  new  Prentises,  and  this  caveat  for  all,  keepe  your  bos- 
omes  lockt,  we  may  be  good  Christians,  but  not  shew  it 
abroad,  190 

Lessen^**  our  Charity  in  times  of  bloud 
When  tyrants  Reigne,  tis  dangerous  to  be  good.      Exeunt. 


^Texts,  "lesse  in." 


184  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

[Act  I.    Scene  3.] 

[Before  Winifred's  Castle  near  a  Well.] 

Enter  Winifred  in  a  blacke  vcdle,  Amphiahell,  Sir^^  Hugh, 
Howell  and  Lords.  Soft  Musick. 

Win.    Cease,  cease,  it  is  too  loude, 
This  tel-tale  noise  betrayes  our  privacy, 
Which  we  desire  more  than  thronging  Visitants, 
What  is  it  you  would  have  of  me,  ile  give 
5  My  state  to  any  of  yee  all,  take  it  away. 
And  give  me  here  onely  my  selfe  to  Governe ; 
More  is  too  much  to  impose  on  my  poore  weakenesse. 

Hugh.    That  is  too  much  Sweet  Lady,  doe  not  taske 
Your  happy  vertues  to  so  hard  a  proofe, 
10  There  is  no  strict  injunction  seal'd,  to  barre 
The  passage  to  a  Nuptiall  Bed,  that  is  a  statute 
By  selfe  will  decreed,  to  make  Hymen  a  bond  slave. 

Win.    O  good  Sir  Hugh,  how  long  have  you  lay'd 
A  fruitles  siege  vnto  a  Fort  that  is  impregnable ; 
'^S  I  thanke  yee,  and  must  needes  acknowledge  my  love. 
If  I  had  such  a  Lunacy,  to  be  a  debt  to  you. 
You  have  deserv'd  it  were  it  worth  Receite. 

Lord.     Then  give  desert  his  due  :^^  leave  of  these  nice 
poynts 
Of  cold  virginity,  and  warme  afifection 
20  In  the  sweet  imbraces  of  a  Noble  Husband, 
Fitter  for  your  state  than  this  Cloyster  habit. 

Hugh.    So  shall  you  win  a  second  power  to  yours, 
This  Noble  Prince  will  with  a  husband  be 
A  strong  defence  against  your  enemies. 
25      Lor.     Adde  to  necessity,  a  proved  Loyalty, 

"Texts  have,  proleptically,  "Saint  Hugh." 
"^Texts  have  a  question  mark  here. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  185 

A  love  that  will  not  claime  equality, 
But  bound  unto. 

Win.    No  more,  no  more  I  pray, 
Why^^  sure  my  foes  would  not  this  Cruell  be, 
To  incounter  me  at  such  unequall  odds, 

So  many  Souldiers  'gainst  a  silly  woman,  30 

You  cannot  call  this  Conquest  if  yee  win : 
I  claime  the  Law  of  Armes,  a  friendly  parley 
Ere  the  Battaile  joyne,  the  time  let  it  be  now ; 
I  crave  the  friendly  Respite  of  a  moneth, 

Meane  time,  let  me  heare  no  more  Love  Alarmes,  35 

Then  will  I  either  yeeld  y-ee  up  the  Fort, 
Or  stand  in  the  defiance. 

Lord.     So  so  sir  Hugh, 
There  is  now  some  hope. 

Hugh.    A  promising  faire  hope, 
More  than  my  three  yeares  service  had  before, 
A  moneth  sweet  Beauty,  O  let  it  be  more  40 

To  shew  my  love  weares  humble  Constancy, 
Let  it  be  two,  or  three. 

Win.     I  take  you  at  your  word,  it  shall  be  three 
Sir  Hugh,  in  which  time,  I  locke,  by  vertue  oi 
This  hand  and  tpnge,  your  hand  from  any  suite  45 

That  sounds  but  love,  you  shall  not  name  the  word 
Within  my  Presence,  tis  breach  of  peace  if  yee  doe. 

Hugh.     You  have  lockt  the  Closset  and  keepe  the  Key 
of  it. 

Lord.     Come  then  sir  Hugh,  since  you  have  truc'd^*  with 
love. 
Lets  deale  with  Armes  another  while,  that  when  50 

Our  foes  come,  they  may  perceive  that  we  expect  'em. 

Hugh.    My  Lif es  my  Countries,  and  He  offert  for  them : 
Three  moneths  I  goe  a  banisht  man  from  hence. 
Yet  this  He  borrow  from  beautious  excellence, 

^Texts,  "Whyle." 
"Texts,  "trust." 


1 86  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

55  When  my  white  Plume  shall  in  the  field  be  spread, 
My  word  of  courage  shall  be  Winifred. 
Exeunt  Hugh  &  Lords. 
Win.    Alas  good  Prince,  I  can  but  pitty  thee. 
And  grieve  because  my  pittie's  pittilesse ; 
Like  a  misers  Almes,  God  helpe;  without  Charity; 

60  For  I  shall  never  quite  thy  labouring  love. 
No  Prince  Amphiabell,  you  have  wedded  me 
To  a  Celestiall  bridegroome,  you  have  taught 
My  ignorance  a  knowing  intellect : 
Tis  well  begun,  and  who  would  not  persevere 

65  To  love  that  love  that  lives,  and  lasts  for  ever  ? 
Am.    I  come  to  strengthen  you  faire  Winifred, 
So  to  continue.*'     I  hope  I  neede  not, 
Yet  not  so  strictly  to  Virginity 
As  to  the  Christian  Faith; 

70  For  Wedlocke  is  an  ordinance  from  Heaven, 
Though  Junior  to  the  single  purity.^^ 
In  this  chast  Wedlocke,  doth  the  Conquest  win, 
She  knowes  the  tree  forbid,  yet^''  will  not  sinne. 
Win.     But  I  have  made  a  vow, 

75  Thinke  then  what  danger  a  relapse  would  be. 
And  you  will  grant  my  best  Virginity ; 
And  I  will  further  shew  what  Heaven  hath  done, 
To  ayde  my  female  Resolution, 
You  then  will  bid  me  crosse  the  booke  of  love, 

80  And  Reade  of  nothing  but  that  text  above. 
Am.    You  promist  me  no  lesse. 
Win.    He  make  it  good : 
See  you  this  spring,  here  a  pretty  streame 
Begins  his  head,  so  late  it  was  a  parching  drought 
Had  ceas'd  our  verdant  grasse,  here  did  I  sit 

85  In  Contemplation,  Hfting  to  Heaven  my  Orisons 
For  present  succour,  but  swifter  then  my  thought, 

"'Texts  have  no  punctuation  here. 
"Texts  have  no  punctuation  here. 
''Texts,  "it." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  187 

All  Potent  Heaven  a  Miracle  had  wrought : 

That  Barren  seeming  Ground  brought  forth  a  Spring 

Of  such  sweet  waters,  as  it  had  not  beene  curst 

I  th'  old  worlds  deluge,  I  caus'd  it  then  90 

Thus  to  be  digg'd  and  fram'd  by  hand  of  men, 

And  comming  still  to  see  it  as  before, 

A  Heavenly  shape  appear'd,  and  blest  it  more; 

Gave  it  that  power  as  heaven  had  so  assign'd, 

To  cure  diseases,  helpe  the  lame  and  blind :  95 

For  which  poore  people  their  poore  thanks  to  tell, 

Calls  as  I  would  not,  Winifreds  Well. 

Am.    Tis  wonderfull !  Musicke. 

Win.    Harke,  these  sounds  did  I  heare 
When  that  Celestiall  body  did  appeare, 

Let  us  with  Reverence  attend  aloof e,  100 

Your  eye  or  eare  shall  have  a  further  proofe. 

Enter,  an  Angell  ascends  out  of  the  Well,  and  after  descends 

againe. 

Ang.    With  this  the  signe  that  holy  Christians  weare. 
When  in  the  Field  their  Standers  they  up  Reare 
Against  the  foes  of  Heaven;  with  this  Tipe, 
That  when  they  receive  the  Scale  Regenerate,  105 

Gives  them  their  Christian  name,  with  this  I  blesse 
Agen  this  hallowed  spring,  who  seekes  Redresse 
With  a  beleeving  heart,  here  he  shall  find  ease. 
Take  power  to  cure  the  leaprous  disease, 

Give  leggs  unto  the  Cripple,  blind  their  Sight,  no 

So  that  their  blessings  be  receiv'd  aright : 
To  misbeleevers  turne  into  a  curse. 
Who  seekes  a  Cure  in  scorne,  disease  him  worse ; 
This  Heaven  hath  done  for  truth,  it  is  but  young, 
And  needes  a  Miracle  to  make  her  strong,  115 

The  time  will  come  when  men  shall  here  not  see. 


1 88  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Then  let  the  world  expresse  fidelity : 

Good  prayers  have  power  to  fetch  an  Angell  downe, 

And  give  a  mortall  an  Immortall  Crowne. 

Musicke  heere  descends. 
120      Am.    I  neede  no  more  confirme  yee  beauteous  Maid, 
My  selfe  ile  taske  unto  some  dangerous  end, 
He  take  disguise,  and  straight  to  Verolome 
And  to  the  face  of  persecuting  Albon 
Our  friend  and  fellow  Knight,  ile  tell  his  curse 
125  If  he  persist  in  Barbarous  Cruelty, 
lie  throw  my  life  in  hazard,  if  I  fall. 
Tell  Christians  keepe  my  true  memoriall. 

Win.    Which  first  leave  here  with  me,  you  shall  doe  well, 
Here  will  I  keepe  my  Court,  here  will  I  dwell, 
130  Here  let  the  Roman  Tyrant  shed  my  bloud. 
Here  they  shall  find  me  doing  all  the  good 
A  poore  wretch  can,  what  heaven  has  blest  before, 
I  as  a  second  meanes  will  helpe  the  poore. 

Am.    To  that  I  leave  thee  most  vertuous  maid, 
^35  Oh  might  it  of  Amphiabell  bee  said; 
His  good  intendment  had  so  happy  end. 
To  make  a  Christian  of  a  blouddy  fiend, 
I  come  to  trie  thee  Albon. 
Win.    Oh  may  it  prove. 

Am.     Thus  wee  depart  Lady  [^Exit.l 

Win.    Where  meete,  it  is  decreed  above.  Exit. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  189 

AcTvs  Secvndvs.     [Scene  i.] 
\^Leodice's  Apartment.'] 
Enter  Leodice,  and  Nurse. 

Leo.    Nurse  ? 

Nu.    Madam? 

Leo.    Are  the  shoo-makers  gone  that  brought  my  Shooes  ? 

Nu.    I  know  not  Madam;  shall  I  see? 

Leo.    My  shooe  wrings  me  so  it  goes  to  the  heart  of  me.     5 

Nu.    Marry  the  Gods  forbid  Lady. 

Leo.     How?  does  the  Gods  forbid  to  Marry  wench? 

Nu.    I  hope  not  Madam,  I  should  be  sorry  they  should. 
For  the  hopes  that  I  have  yet  as  old  as  I  am, 
Shall  I  goe  call  your  Shoo-maker?  ^° 

Leo.    Prethee  doe,  but  stay  a  little ; 

Nu.    A  little  stay  may  make  me  looke  too  late. 

Leo.    Thou  sai'st  true,  call  'em  then,  yet  harke,  'twere  as 
good  not, 
The  fault  cannot  be  mended  now : 

Nu.     But  you  may  let  him  know  his  fault,  and  heele  mend  1 5 
it  another  time. 

Leo.    I  thou  saist  true  in  that,  doe,  harke  ere  thou  goest. 

Nu.    Venus  blesse  us,  what  crosse  measures  are  in  your 
head! 

Leo.     How's  that,  youle  not  controule  your  Princes  will  20 
yee? 
Is  it  not  stately  to  be  Phantasticall, 
Goe  call  the  Shoo-maker  yet  you  shall  not  neither. 

Nu.    Ene  as  you  please,  Madam,  both  either,  or  neither. 

Leo.     You  shall  doe  all,  goe,  yet  answer  to  me  first. 
Was  this  young  Shoo-maker  ere  here  before?  25 

Nu.    I  thinke  not  Madam,  tis  some  young  Prentice 
Your  old  shoo-maker  of  Feversham  hath  got. 


igo  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Leo.    Wast  not  a  pretty  youth  ? 
Nu.    I  have  seene  a  worse  face  in  better  cloathes. 
30      Leo.    He  drew  my  shooes  on  finely,  quietly. 

Nu.     He  would  doe  well  if  he  knew  the  true  length  of 

your  foot  Madam. 
Leo:     Tis  that  he  wants,  he  must  know  it,^  call  him  agen. 
Nu.    I  will :  If  you  doubt  call  me  backe.  Exit  Nurse. 

Leo.     The  length  of  my  foot, 
35  A  pretty  figure  if  he  be  a  good  Anatomist, 
He  may  by  one  quantity  guesse  at  another. 
And  in  the  end  take  the  whole  bodies  length 
Ha,  some  strange  fantasies  are  crept  within  me, 
I'me  not  acquainted  with,  tis  a  pretty  youth 
40  If  I  may  credit  my  judgement  at  the  first  sight. 
And  whats  that  to  me,  and  why  not  to  me 
As  well  as  to  another :  I  am  alone. 
And  why  should  I  feare  to  tell  my  selfe  my  thoughts, 
I  could  love  him,  this  tasts  well  of  my  tongue; 
45  Oh,  but  the  coursenes  of  his  condition 

Offends  my  stomacke,  when  I  should  digest  it. 
Some  Sectarist  now  to  screw  and  wrest  a  Text 
From  his  native  sence,  would  helpe  me  well  in  this. 
What  am  I,  a  woman,  whats  he,^  a  man, 
50  Where's  the  inequality?  my  bloud  Royall, 

His  perhaps  ignoble,  whence  springs  that  fount 
That  runs  all  Royalty,  tis  the  Sea  it  selfe. 
The  lesser  Rivolets  and  running  Brookes 
Are  those  of  common  sence,  yet  all  doe  mixe 
55  And  run  in  one  another,  what  are  Titles, 
Honors  bestow'd  ad  Regis  placitum, 
Should  my  father  make  that  shoo-maker  a  Lord, 
Then  were  he  Noble,  yet  where's  his  bloud  refine, 

'Texts  have  no  punctuation  here. 
'Texts  have  no  punctuation  here. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  191 

Tush  tush,  greatnesse  is  like  a  glistering  stone, 

More  pretious  in  the  esteeme  than  in  the  vertue :  60 

So,  I  am  well  cald  out  of  my  contemplation. 

Enter  Nurse  with  Crispmus,  and  Barnahy,  with  Shooes  on 

their  Annes. 

Nu.    Come  sir,  you  must  answer  a  default  to  my  Lady. 

Leo.    Who  made  my  shooes  sirra,  they  pinch  me? 

Bar.  Indeed  sweet  Lady  you  must  pardon  this  young 
man,  'tis  his  fault,  he  has  not  yet  the  true  handling  of  his  65 
worke,  hee  cannot  goe  through  stich  yet,  I  hope  your  Ladi- 
ship  knowes  that  I  have  yorkt  as  well  for  you,  as  any  Cord- 
wainer  in  Kent  or  Canterbury  could  doe,  and  for  a  tunable 
heele  I  thinke  I  have  plaid  my  part. 

Leo.    A  tunable  heele,  I  prethee  English  it.  70 

Bar.  A  creake  Madam,  for  a  Musicall  creake,  nere  a  boy 
in  Feversham  yet  went  beyond  me :  in  time  my  Junior  will 
doe  pretty  well,  he's  raw  yet,  at  the  change  of  his  voyce 
heele  creake  farre  better  than  he  does  yet. 

Nu.    And  why  was  the  creake  of  shooes  first  devised  sir?  75 

Bar.  O  for  great  cause  for  sooth,  to  hide  faults,  for  if  a 
gentlewoman  such  as  your  selfe,  should  chance  to  play  too 
loud  of  her  wind  instrument,  the  creake  of  the  shooe  will 
cover  the  noyse. 

Leo.    You're  pleasant  sir,  and  what  is  this  a  Prentice  ?       80 

Bar.  Alas  Madam,  I  would  be  loath  to  discredit  the 
young  man,  hee's  but  a  colt  yet,  a  subsizer  as  they  say,  I 
brought  him  along  to  the  Court  to  shew  him  fashions,  and 
to  instruct  him  how  to  handle  a  ladies  Legg,  to  draw  home 
his  worke,  and  teach  him  his  nill  ultra  how  farre  he  may  85 
goe. 

Leo.    And  how  farr's  that,  which  are  your  bounds  ? 

Bar.  Non  ultra  crepitum  as  they  say,  this  once  learned, 
hee  shall  come  alone  hereafter. 


192  A  Shoo-fnaker  a  Gentleman 

90      Leo.    You  have  done  well  sir,  and  so  no  doubt  will  he 
By  my  instructions ;  whats  thy  name  ? 
Cris.    Crispinus  Madam. 
Nu.    Were  thy  Parents  of  this  profession? 
Cris.    I  have  forgot  Madam. 
Leo.    Is  it  so  long  since  thou  lost  them? 
Cris.    But  since  these  last  warres  Lady,  yet  as  I  remember 
95  They  were  better  then  my  present  profession. 

Leo.^     \^Aside.'\     He  speakes  well,   sure  there  is  some 
hard  characters 
Which  I  understand  not :     [To  Crispinus. '\     I  like  not  these 

shooes. 
You  must  make  an  easier  pare  ? 

Cris.    He  doe  my  best  to  mend  it  Madam. 
100      Leo.    You  promise  well,  let  them  be  of  your  making  then, 
That  I  may  see  how  neare  you'le  come  to  your  promise. 
Bar.     Alas  Madam,  heele  pinch  your  toes  if  I  doe  not 
instruct  him, 
Hee's  but  a  cobler  yet. 

Leo.    No  matter.  He  hazard  his  good  will,  to  morrow 
105  Let  me  have  an  other  paire,  and  bring  them  your  selfe. 
Cris.    I  shall  attend  your  Highnesse. 
Leo.    Come  hither  view  my  foot  well,  you  must  be  better 

acquainted  with  it. 
Cris.    Is  it  not  heere  they  pinch  you  Madam  ? 
Leo.    No  'tis  a  little  higher. 
no      Bar.    Away,  away  for  shame,  did  I  teach  you  that  car- 
riage?    [Draws  Crispinus  hack.'\ 
Leo.    Now  sir  what  will  you  doe  ? 

Bar.     Teach  him  the  true  behaviour,  heare,  levell  me  a 
legge  here,  now  stretch  him  out-right  upon  your  thigh,  and 
115  then  you  may  come  to  your  worke  finely,  I  have  found  the 
fault  now  you  are  pincht  in  the  very  cranny. 

'Texts,  "Nu". 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  193 

Leo.    You  have  hit  it  Sir. 

Bar.  I  told  you  so,  a  man  of  a  longer  standing  will  doe 
alwaies  better  then  a  puny,  he  shall  mend  it  I  warrant  you 
Madam.  120 

Leo.    I  hope  he  will :  well,  faile  me  not  to  morrow. 

Cris.    I  will  not  Madam,  my  duty  to  your  Highnesse. 

Bar.     If  he  doe  Madam,  you  know  your  old  man,  for 
yarke  and  seame,  and  handling  ware  in  his  kind,  you  cannot 
put  your  legge  in  a  better  workemans  hands  though  I  say  it  125 
sweet  Lady.     Due  gat  a  whee.  Exit  Crisp,  and  Bar. 

Leo.    There  is  an  Idoll  or  bed  in  his  eye,  that  I  could  ever 
worship ; 
And  if  I  should,  sure  he  would  blesse  me,  love  and  folly, 
Inseperate  and  joynt  companions,  you  are  too  violent 
Upon  me  now;  to  beate  affection  with  130 

Such  downe  right  strokes  on  a  Mechanicke  drudge, 
A  base,  how  base  ?  how  base  ?  is  there  no  President 
That  great  Ladies  have  yoakt  their  underlings  in  fellowship? 
I'll  take  some  counsell  on't.  Nurse.* 

Nu.     Shall  I  call  the  shoo-maker  agen  Lady?  135 

Leo.     Out  witch,   dost   know   my  thoughts :   the   shoo- 
maker. 
And  why  the  shoo-maker  ?  I  thought  of  him,  why  call  him  ? 

Nti.     Nay  I  know  not  Madam. 

Leo.    Thor't  in  love  with  him,  I  beleeve  thou  art,  if  I  were 
certaine 
That  thou  wert  so  base,  I'de  banish  thee  my  presence;  140 

Nay,  my  Father  should  banish  thee  the  bounds  of  Britany, 
Out  old  doting  foole. 

Nu.     Madam  why  chide  you  me?     I  will  not  love  your 
shoo-maker. 

Leo.    My  shoo-maker  minion. 

'Texts,  "I  take  some  counsell,  on't  Nurse." 


194  ^  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

145      Nu.    Does  he  not  make  your  shooes  ?  therefore  your  shoo- 
maker  : 
But  thinke  not  Lady  I  can  be  so  base 
Being  so  neare  your  presence,  to  love  such  a  groome, 
If  but  for  your  credit  sake. 

Leo.    Yet  as  great  as  you  have  doted  on  as  base  as  he. 
150      Nu.  Yet  that's  no  president  for  me,  I  have  knowne  Ladies 
Remove  their  stable  groomes  into  their  bed-chambers, 
And  lower  offices  then  that  too :  o  'twas  a  pollicy, 
And  hereafter  may  be  in  fashion  for  great  Ladies 
To  match  with  their  inferiours,  because  the  woman 
155  Adding  no  dignity  to  the  man,  nor  loosing  her  owne. 
Still  keepes  supremacy,  he  waites  as  dutifull 
On  her  trencher  as  when  he  was  her  servant. 
Leo.    Hast  thou  History  for  this? 

Nu.    Twenty  of  mine  owne  knowledge,  that  I  have  scene 
in  my  dayes. 
160      Leo.     Come  to  my  closet,  then  thou  shalt  tell  me  some, 
If  thou  pleasest,  we  will  be  friends  agen, 
If  I  find  president  He  follow  it, 
(He  else  begin  my  selfe,)  if  there  be  none 
Let  after  Ladies  coate  me  downe  for  one.  Exeunt. 

[Act  II.    Scene  2.  J 
[Near  Verulam.] 

Enter  Amphiahell  as  am  Hermit,  and  Albon. 

Al.    Thou  constant  friend  what  title  shall  I  give, 
Due  to  thy  merit ;  'tis  more  than  a  friendly  part 
To  fetch  from  hell,  friends  tume  at  misery. 
They  abide  long  that  part  at  prison  doores, 
5  The  best  lasts  but  till  death,  but  thou  hast  stood 
The  renovation  of  a  second  life; 


A  Shoo-ttmker  a  Gentlemmi  195 

What  may  be  given  him  for  an  epethite 
That  of  a  tyrant  makes  a  proselite  ? 

Am.    You  cannot  adde  unto  the  happinesse 
Amphiabell  hath  found  in  honor'd  Albon,  10 

Joynt  with  my  owne  Salvation,  I  desire 
Your  partnership  in  Christianity, 
Which  as  a  second  meanes  I  have  confirm'd. 

Al.     I  am  your  poore  Disciple,  my  tutor  Master.® 
But  friend  I  call  you  by  no  other  name,  15 

Although  I  derogate  from  your  Princely  Office 
Cause  I  will  follow  you,  if  not  proceede. 
Even*  through  the  jawes  of  persecution; 
I  will  not  trust  your  person  to  the  danger : 
Let  this  helpe  your  haste,  although  Prince  of  Wales,  20 

Yet  in  the  course  you  take  you  may  chance  need 
This  drudging  god  of  fooles  to  helpe  you  speed. 

Am.    He  take  your  love,  for  what  I  shall  not  need 
I  shall  bestow  where  there  is  need  enough. 
With  this  memoriall  I  leave  you  Sir.       [Gives  him  a  cross.]  25 
Weare  but  this  Embleme  of  a  Christian, 
Not  as  a  thing  materiall  to  availe  you, 
But  for  the  strengthning  of  your  memory. 
You  shall  at  sight  of  this  still  keep  in  mind, 
All  those  instructions  I  have  read  to  you ;  30 

And  vertueous''  Lord,  what  in  your  power  and  greatnesse 
You  may  afford  unto  distressed  Christians : 
Be  free  in  Charity. 

Al.    Let  me  approve 
Without  a  boast,  the  action  of  my  love ; 

This  in  the  open  face  of  tyranny,  35 

He  daring  weare :  and  in  approbation 
Of  such  an  Alter,  Sacrifice  my  bloud : 

'Texts,  "Mr." 
Texts,  "ever." 
'Texts,  "verueous." 


196  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

But  sweet  friend  heare  of  me,  behold  it  not : 
I  wo'd  not  have  you  lost. 
Amphi.    You  shall  prevaile. 
40      Al.    Put  me  in  your  praiers,  that  mercies  white  hand 
May  crosse  the  debt  booke  wherein  I  stand 
Above  my  height  in  goare,  this  hand  hath  done 
An  act  of  bloody  persecution. 

Am.    Trouble  not  your  bosome,  your  end  shall  crowne 
45  The  bad  that's  past,  with  a  more  full  renowne.     Exit  Amphi. 

Florish.     Enter  with  Drum  and  Colours,  Maxindnus, 
Basseanus,  RutuUus,  with  an  Army. 

Max.    Where  is  Lord  Albon? 

Al.    Heere  Maxeminus. 

Max.    What,  thy  Sword  sleeping  in  thy  scabberd  Knight  ? 
Thou  art  too  gentle  in  thy  Stewardship, 
These  Hidra  headed  Christians  more  increase 
50  Thy  persecution ;  speake  Prince  of  Knights, 
For  such  an  honour  we  bestow'd  on  thee : 
Why  art  not  wading  in  a  sreame  of  blood  ? 
True  Romans  use  to  swim  in  such  a  floud. 

Al.    But  I  am  an  English  man. 

Max.    Yet  substitute  to  Rome. 
55     Al.    Not. 

Max.    Is  this  Albon  ? 

Al.    Not  persecuting,  but  Christian  Albon. 

Bass.    See  great  Emperour,  in  your  face  he  weares, 
The  daring  badge  of  Christianity. 

Al.    Yes  Emperour,  reade  in  this  booke,  if  by  this  abstract 
60  Thou  canst  understand,  the  Volume  is  within. 

Max.    'Tis  as  we  suspect. 
That  painefull  Schoole-master  Amphiabell^  is  heere, 

'Texts,  "Am."     In  several  later  places  where  the  meter  requires 
abbreviations  to  be  written  in  full,  the  change  has  been  made  silently. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentlemcm  197 

Make  swift  and  carefull  search  through  Virulome, 
Lop  him  and  the  head  is  perisht. 

Al.    You'le  search  too  late. 

Max.    Where  is  he  traytor?  65 

Al.     Gone,  I  have  convaide  him  hence. 

Max.     Why  didst  thou  not  fly  for  thine  owne  safety? 

Al.    No,  I  have  deserv'd  to  feele  a  Tyrants  swrord. 
Because  my  sword  was  glaz'd  in  tyrany; 
I  am  in  debt  for  bloud,  make  thou  it  even, 
Tyrants  and  fiends  are  officers  to  heaven.  70 

Ma^.     Hale  him  to  the  Temple,  or  force  him  kneele 
Unto  our  Roman  god,  or  kill  the  heriticke. 

Al.     Kill  me  first,  or  I  shall  spurne  thine  Idoll. 

Max.     If  he  recant  not,  torture,  no  mercy  show. 
A  recreant  friend  worse  than  an  open  foe.  75 

Al.    I  am  blest  in  curses,  now  Albon  shall  be  tride, 
Man  is  gold  oare,  when  he  is  purifi'd. 

Exit.  Alb.  [guarded.] 

Max.    A  second  limbe  is  from  our  body  cut, 
In  Albons  relapse;  it  is  that  pedant  Prince, 
That  seminary  Knight  Amphiabell,  80 

That  poysons  thus  the  current  of  our  State: 
Bassianus,  with  two  Romane  legions 
Persue  that  Cambriam  sectarist  Amphiabell: 
His  flight  will  be  to  Wales,  lay  desolate 
The  confines  of  that  superstitious  Virgin,  85 

That  with  her  sorcerous  devotion 

Works  miracles,  by  which  she  drawes  Christians,  faster 
Then  we  can  kill  'em :  let  her  feele  oiir.  vengeance. 

Bass.    As  Maximinus  wils, 
Where  Ceser  bids  strike  Bassiamus  kils.  90 

Max.     What  meanes  this? 

Enter  Rutullus,  and  Nuntius. 

Rut.    A  messenger  from  Dioclesian. 
Nun.    Faire  and  Royall  greetings, 


198  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

With  them  intreating  great  Maximinus. 
95  Some  present  succour  in  this  Gallia  Wars, 

Allerick  King  of  Goaths  hath  entred  France, 

With  ods  of  strength  against  Dioclesian; 

A  breathing  truce  is  yet  concluded  on, 

Untill  the  Callends  of  the  following  moneth, 
100  In  which  there  is  a  day  prefixt  for  battell. 

For  this  he  craves  thy  ayde  from  Brittany, 

That  Romans  still  may  write  victoria. 

Max.    We,  or  our  best  of  helpe  he  might  command, 

By  vertue  of  that  love  he  lent  to  us: 
105  Ruttullus,  collect   loooo.  ablest  Brittaines 

By  our  express  command,  let  them  be  mixt 

With  two  Roman  Bands,  with  both  passe  the  Sea, 

And  in  our  name  great  Dioclesian : 

Say  we  doe  wish  our  personall  Arme  with  him, 
1 10  Did  not  increasing  troubles  stay  us  here : 

So  should  it  be;  the  rest  weele  write  to  him, 

Rutullus  haste,  this  must  not  be  delay'd : 

Bassianus  to  thy  charge,  my  selfe  to  mine. 

Our  works  are  one  to  scourge  the  Christians, 
115  Bloud  is  the  theame  we  treate  in  Roman  hand, 

Weele  write  the  comment  large  o're  all  the  land.     Exeunt. 


[Act  II.    Scene  3.] 

[Leodice's  Apartment.] 

Enter  Leodice,  and  Nurse. 

Leo.    Nay  prethee  tell  it  on  Nurse. 

Nu.    Good  faith  I  am  weary  Madam, 
I  never  knew  my  tongue  would  tire  before: 
You  have  not  let  me  close  mine  eyes  to  night. 
5      Leo.    Did  not  I  watch  with  thee? 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentlenum  199 

Nu.    But  I  am  old, 
When  I  was  yong,  love  would  have  kept  me  waking. 

Leo.     So  could  a  young  Batchelor  yet,  widdow, 
I  prethe  finish  but  thy  last  discourse 
'Mongst  all  thy  Cotations  of  men  made^  great 
That  were  ignoble  borne,  this  I  most  desire;  10 

Was  Dioclesian  joynt  caesar"  with  my  Father, 
That  oft  hath  made  Rome  gorgeous  with  his  triumphs, 
But  of  so  meane  discent  as  thou  reports? 

Nu.     A  Scriveners  sonne,  no  better  A'erily, 
There's  many  Bonds  yet  in  Rome  uncanceld,  15 

Where  hee's  subscri'd  a  publicke  notary. 

Leo.    And  yet  is  that  no  blemish  to  his  sonne  ? 

Nu.    Not  at  all  Madam,  nay  I  could  come  neerer 
Were  I  sure  it  would  not  oflfend  your  Grace. 

Leo.    My  Grace  be  pledge,  out,  prethee  speake  freely?       20 

Nu.     As  I  have  heard  great  Maximinus  Father, 
Your  Fathers  Father  Madam,  was  but  even  a  Smith, 
That  with  his  labour  hammer'd  out  his  living. 

Leo.     'Tis  true, 
I  have  heard  my  Father  boast  it,  yet  had  I  forgot  it.  25 

Oh  Majesty!  thou  maymest  the  memory. 
It  looseth  all  Records  that  are  beneath  us, 
Now  no  more :  prethee  see  if  my  shoo-maker  be  come  yet, 
He  walke  abroad  perhaps  to  take  the  aire. 

Nu.     [Aside.]     'Tis  now  my  every  mornings  worke  to  30 
watch 
The  comming  of  your  shoo-maker:  pray  Venus 
My  Lady  tread  not  her  shooes  awry,  she  changes 
Her  shooes  so  often.  Exit  Nurse. 

Leo.    I  have  not  slept  to  night, 
I  shall  be  tame  if  I  be^*  kept  thus  waking: 

Texts,  semicolon  after  "made." 

"Texts,  "caeser." 

""If  I  be"  occurs  twice  here  in  the  texts. 


200  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

35  lie  give  thee  s(;ope  thou  mutenous  rebell  Love, 
He  plainely  speake  and  wooe ; 
'Tis  that  which  many  wish,  tho  few  dares  doe, 
Let  such  ones  blush  whose  actions  merit  blame, 
My  love  is  honest ;  and  it  needs  not  shame. 

Enter  Nurse,  Crisp,  with  shooes. 

40      Nu.     Madam,  your  shoo-maker's^^  come. 

Leo.    Hee's  welcome ;  I  hope  you'le  fit  me  now  ? 
Chri.    Or  else  He  promise  faire  Madam. 
Leo.    And  a  faire  promise  will  be  accepted  if  I 
Can  get  no  more.    Nurse  I'de  be  private,  be  it 
45  Your  charge  to  keepe  gard  without  doores  that  none  come 
in 
Nu.     [Aside.]    Hey  ho,  these  pretty  toyes  of  my  Ladies 
makes  me  call 
My  youth  to  account  againe,  e'ne  such  Mad  changes 
Had  I  in  my  head  in  those  dales.    Well  shoo-maker, 
If  thou  dost  not  fit  her  for  vpper  leather  and  sole  too, 
50  I  would  thou  might  never  aspire  so  high  as  the  instep  agen, 
I  would  I  had  an  old  shooe  to  throwe  at  thy  head.        Exit. 
Leo.    Put  to  these  Roses. 
Cri.    I  shall  Madam. 

Leo.     [Aside.]     'Tis  I  must  speake,  should  I  stay  his 
beginning, 
I  might  have  the  greene  sicknes  first,  'tis  blushing  worke : 
55  Prompt  me  sweet  love,  if  I  doe  loose  my  selfe. 
He  talke  a  while  at  distance  with  him,  perhaps 
He  may  understand  me  the  nearest  path  I  would 
Avoyde  the  beaten  way.     [Aloud.]     Let  me  see,  a  pretty 
shoe.^* 
Cris.     'Tis  made  by  a  fine  paterne  Madarn. 

"Texts,  "shoo-makers." 

"Texts,  "way,  let  me  see  a  pretty  shoe?" 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  201 

Leo.     My  foot  you'Ie  say :  well ;  I  owe  you  nothing  for  60 
that, 
For  I  commend  your  ware  and  you  my  foot, 
But  prethee  tell  me  one  thing  I  apprehend.^* 
Was  not  this  velvet  unhappy  to  be  made 
A  servant  to  the  foot,  that  might  have  beene 
A  familier  companion  with  his  Ladies  hand?  65 

Her  legge,  her  foot,  nay,  even  her  favorite, 
The  happy  maske  that  dwells  upon  her  lips  ? 

Cris.    This  was  not  the  websters  fault  Madam. 

Leo.     No,  'twas  the  shoo-makers,  you  have  condemn'd 
your  selfes. 

Cris.    The  fault  deserves  not  death  Lady,  for  though  the  70 
limbes, 
Have  in  themselves  height  and  priority, 
Yet  are  they  all  one  peice,  as  one  body,  they  equall, 
'Cause  one  cannot  want  another  and  be  a  perfect  body. 

Leo.     'Tis  true,  beggers  and  Kings  are  all  one  peece 
Of  earth,  nor  can  the  head  be  without  the  foot;  75 

He  understands  well  if  he  could  aply  it : 
Thus  'tis  englisht ;  I  cannot  be  without  his  company : 
Come  pull  on  my  shooes,  art  not  well,  let  me  feele  thy  tem- 
ples? 

Cris.    Yes  Madam,  I'me  in  health  I  thanke  my  preserver. 

Leo.    I  began  to  feare,  'cause  thou  wast  drawing  on.  80 

Cris.    You  make  me  smile  Lady. 

Leo.    Dost  thou  ?  let  me  see  how  thou  smilest. 

Cris.    I  shal  blush  then  Madam,  if  you  looke  on,  is  it  not 
easie  Madam? 

Leo.    To  looke  on  yes,  farre  easier  than  to  worke. 

Cris.    I  meane  your  foot  Madam. 

Leo.    I  meane  as  well  as  you  sir :  have  you  done  ?  85 

Cris.    Yes  Madam. 

**Texts,  no  punctuation  here. 


202    •  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Leo.    But  I  have  not,  I  must  chide  you  now  sir. 

Cris.    That  will  helpe  my  blushing  indeed,  and  make  me 
looke  pale; 
But  I  hope  your  Ladiship  has  no  cause. 

Leo.     Great  cause  sir : 
I  heare  you  are  a  Sutor  to  my  woman. 
90      Cris.    A  Sutor  Lady  ?    I  understand  it  not  ? 

And  to  your  g-entlewoman  ?  'twere  great  presumption. 

Leo.  You  know  your  fault  then,  I  wo'd  wish  you  mend  it ; 
I  speake  what  I  have  seene :  You  are  a  Sutor  to  my  woman. 

Cris.    Madam. 
95      Leo.    Nay,  nay,  protest  not  to  the  contrary,  'tis  so  usually, 
He  have  thee  punisht  for't,  my  Fathers  power, 
If  mine  cannot  do't,  shall  crosse  you  sharpely  for  it : 
[Aside.]     'Lasse  I  have  chid  too  much; 
[Aloud.]   Come,  come  He  rather  pardon  thee  than  hurt  thee; 
100  Nay,  prethee  do^^  not  sinke  within  my  presence, 
Let  me  feele  thy  hand,  his  pulses  beat  not, 
Th'art  cold  i'th  mouth  I  thinke.  Kisses  him. 

Cris.    Had  I  beene,  this  had  reviv'd  me. 

Leo.    What  had  reviv'd  you  sir  ? 
105      Cris.     That  touch  from  your  sweet  lip. 

Leo.     Why  sir,  doe  not  thinke  that  kisse  was  any  favour, 
But  to  supply  the  want  of  Rosa-solis.^® 

Cris.     'Twas  far  re  better  Madam. 

Leo.    I  am  glad  it  pleas'd  you  sir ;  but  I  have  not  forgot 
1 10  My  former  words,  I  say  thou  art  a  Sutor  to  my  woman." 

Cris.    Madam,  in  this  reviv'd  memory  I  protest. 

Leo.     Thou  shalt  not  sweare  and  lye,  He  make  it  plaine 
To  thy  confession ;  art  not  her  shoo-maker  ? 

Cris.    Yes  Madam. 


r.>  n 


■Texts,  "do". 

"Texts,  question  mark. 

"Texts,  question  mark. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  203 

Leo.     Then  her  Sutor;  I  am  a  Roman  sir,  and  speake  115 
that  tongue; 
Is  not  a  Sutor  a  Shoo-maker  ?  V 

Cris.    My  trade,  in  that  sence  I  confesse  it  Lady, 
And  so  farre  I  am  a  Sutor  to  your  Highnesse. 

Leo.    I  would  thou  wert,  in  the  plaine  English  sence, 
Thou  shouldst  have  then  few  nayes.  120 

Cris.    I  trouble  you  Madam. 

Leo.    Not :  since  I  am  so  farre  in  discourse  with  you. 
He  bring  it  to  some  end :  suppose  shoo-maker 
My  woman  did  love  you,  and  would  have  me  to  speake  for 

her, 
What  answer  should  I  have? 

Cris.     Madam,  this  intercourse,  you  have  vouchsafed  so  125 
kindly 
With  your  Servant  somewhat  inboldens  me. 

Leo.    Be  bold,  and  say  what  answer  shall  I  have  ? 

Cris.     Shee's  old. 

Leo.    Old !  this  is  a  new  answer ;  will  not  her  dignity, 
Wealth,  and  Estate,  make  her  yong  agen?  130 

Cris.    I  could  not  chuse 
By  supposition  so,  if  I  durst  speake  freely. 

Leo.    You  would  have  one  yong  then  I  perceive? 

Cris.    Since  I  am  free  to  speake,  I  would  Lady ; 
Yong  for  my  eye,  and  rich  to  mend  my  state : 
But  alas  Madam,  I  am  a  prentise  and  must  not  wed.  135 

Leo.    For  doubling  of  your  prentiship? 

Cris.    Nay,  I  might  treble  that  doubling,  for  to  a  wife 
I  bind  me  to  a  perpetuall  prentiship. 

Leo.     So  'twere  one  you  lov'd,  'twere  pleasing  servitude  ? 

Cris.    I  thinke  it  were  Madam.  ^4o 

Leo.    Dare  you  venture  on  a  wife  of  my  chusing? 

Cris.    If  both  parties  were  agreed  Lady. 

Leo.    That's  no  venture.  He  promise  she  shall  be  yong, 
Good  parentage,  honest,  let  her  beauty  commend  it  selfe. 


204  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

145      Cris.    It  pleases  Majesty  some  times  to  make  sport 
With  humble  vasselage,  so  doe  you  with  me  Lady. 

Leo.    You  are  too  hard  of  beleefe,  I  meane  plainely, 
I  have  some  skill  in  Magicke,  what  would  you  give 
To  see  her  amply  personated  in  a  glasse, 
150  That  must  be  your  wife? 

Cris.     I  would  venture  a  chiding  to  stay  so  long:  what 

may  this  mean? 
Leo.     I  could  by  Metroposcopie  read  thy  fate^® 
Here  in  thy  fore-head :  by  Chyromancie  find  it 
In  thy  Palme,  but  these  are  petty  arts,  no  He  shew  thee 
155  By  speculatory  magick,  her  face  in  this  glasse; 
Kneele  sir,  for't  must  be  done  with  reverence 
I  tell  you :  now  tell  me  what  thou  seest? 
Cris.    I  see  a  shadow  Madam. 

Leo.    'Tis  but  a  shadow,  hold  up  thy  right  hand  and  looke 
Agen,  what  seest  thou  now?  any  substance  yet? 
160      Cris.     I  know  not  Madam,  I  am  inchaunted  with  your 
Magick. 
Leo.    How  lik'st  her  now,  has  she  a  good  face? 
Cris.    Tis  very  well  made  Madam. 
Leo.    Who  does  she  resemble? 
Cris.    Your  selfe,  I  4:hinke  Lady. 
165      Leo.    I,  shees  very  like  me. 
Cris.    I  would  she  were  not. 
Leo.    Why  wouldst  not  have  her  like  me  ? 
Cris.    Because  no  like's  the  same. 
Leo.    'Tis  too  long  to  dally,  away  with  shadowes, 
170  And  imbrace  the  substance,  introth  I  love  thee; 
Nay,  doe  not  feare — He  share  all  dangers  with  thee. 

Cris.    Danger  Madam,  were  she  brow'd  like  Nemisis, 
Tuskt  with  Scorpions  stings,  as  keene  for  spoyle 
As  an  incensed  fury,  I  would  stand 

"A.  has  "face." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  205 

In  this  quarrell  'gainst  her  open  throat:  175 

But  doe  you  not  dally  with  a  poore  wretch? 

Leo.     Wrong  not  my  love  with  doubt,  looke  He  pay  thee 
backe 
Thy  duty  given  to  me,  th'art  my  better 
By  vertue  of  my  honourable  love, 

I  make  thee  here  my  head :  Thou  shalt  no  more  180 

Descend  unto  my  foot,  here  thy  worke  shall  be. 
Whilst  in  thine  eyes  two  wanton  Cupids  skip. 
Thou  shalt  lay  Velvet  touches  on  my  lip. 

Cris.     Faith  Madam,  your  lips  deserve  better  than  your 
foot, 
That's  two  pild  velvet,  this  must  needs  be  three :  185 

Nay  since  you  have  rais'd  me  above  the  instep 
He  reach  at  the  highest  now. 

Leo.    Yet  all's  not  done, 
Two  paire  of  Rosie  cheeks  shall  tye  them  on : 
Shall  I  not  neede  to  feare  thee  ? 

Cris.     Not,  He  quell  your  feares,  for  now  He  put  190 

My  life  into  your  hands,  to  manifest 
The  vertue  of  my  love,  for  Heaven  hath  beene  a  motive 
To  your  love :  For  know  sweet,  'tis  no  base  contract, 
But  of  the  Royalst  Blood  in  Britany : 

Love  would  not  so  have  forc'd  you  to  an  errour,  195 

Crispinus  is  but  borrowed,  a  poore  shroud 
To  keepe  my  life  in,  Offa  is  my  owne, 
The  youngest  Sonne  to  the  late  vanquisht  Alured, 
Eldred  my  Brother,  both  supposed  slaine. 
Yet  live  within  a  parralell  disguise ;  200 

I  am  no  richer  than  I  was  before, 
But  in  that  clouded  Title. 

Leo.    If  I  could  love  thee  better  than  I  did  I  should. 
But  introth  I  cannot,  but  for  the  safest  gardian 
Of  thy  life,  'tis  in  my  heart,  and  that  shall  be  pluckt  out      205 
Ere  it  be  found  to  harme  thee. 


2o6  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Cris.     What's  then  to  be  done? 
Leo.     Our  instant  Marriage,  that's  the  surest  way, 
Hazard  a  chiding  for  thy  negligence. 
And  linger  here  about  the  court  to  night, 
210T0  morrow  morning  in  some  humble  habit 
Week  steale  the  gardian;  it  shall  be  my  taske 
To  provide  the  Church-man. 

Cris.    There  shall  not  want  a  Bride-groome. 
Leo.     May  I  ever  lye  alone  if  there  want  a  Bride, 
And  that's  a  curse  that  I  should  be  loath  to  indure, 
215  Mean  time  be  this  the  contract,  this  the  word  of  troth. 

Cris.    The  morning  and  a  Priest  shall  make  one  of  both. 

Leo.     There  goes  my  heart. 

Cris.    He  keepe  it  till  to  morrow. 

Leo.    Shut  night,  sweet  Phebe  on  thy  swiftest  Arrow. 

Exit  Leo. 

Cris.     What  pretty  flies  in  loves  sweet  web  doe  lurke, 

220  I  must  be  Married,  then  unto  my  worke.  Exit  Cris. 

AcTvs  Tertivs.     [Scene  i.] 
[Winifred's  Residence  by  the  Sacred  Pool,  as  before.] 
Enter  Sir  Hugh. 

Hugh.     My  three  moneths  banishment  I  have  observ'd, 
And  now  the  dated  limit  gives  me  leave 
To  re-aproach  my  interdicted  Saint; 
Once  more  sweet  love  I  doe  invoke  thy  power, 
5  To  blesse  my  poore  unspotted  Sacrifice, 
The  offering  of  a  loving  loyall  heart : 
This  is  the  customary  retirement 
Where  daily  she  frequents,  this  speakes  her  name. 
And  speakes  her  vertues  in  a  bubling  murmur, 
10  Which  many  ages  after  her  Ascent 
Up  to  that  glorious  Asterisme  above. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  207 

Shall  keepe  and  tell  to  long  Posterities, 
Within  this  liquid  Oracle  shall  be  read, 
Heaven  wrought  a  miracle  for  Winifred, 
Heere  He  awaite,  and  while  my  tongue  takes  rest,  15 

Solace  my  thought.  Lies  downe. 

Enter  Winifred,  with  a  booke  and  a  servant. 

Win.     Returne  and  give  notice  to  Amphiabell, 
That  I  am  walk't  abroad,  as  he  intreated. 

Ser.    I  will  Madam.     [Exit.] 

Win.     His  company  is  sweet  fellowship;  wanton  folly, 
Thou  hast  no  harbour  in  Amphiabell,  20 

But  high  and  holy  meditations. 
Rare  vertues  in  a  Prince,  the  example's  good, 
And  I  will  follow  it;  yea  if  thou  goest 
Into  the  Militant  Field  of  Martyrdome. 

Ha,  who's  that?  this  is  not  the  company  25 

That  my  desires  doe  wish. 

Hugh.     Nay  stay  sweet  Virgin,  rather  let  me  leave  the 
place, 
Whose  presence  offends  the  place ;  yet,  if  you  vouchsafe, 
Offend  I  may  by  your  construction, 
But  not  by  willing  heart.  30 

Win.     I  feare  your  method  sir,  would  I  might  erre 
In  false  supposition,  speake  and  He  tell  you. 

Hugh.     My  three  moneths  exile  is  expired. 

Win.     And  you  have  well  observ'd  it? 

Hugh.     Then  give  me  leave  to  re-atempt  my  suite,  35 

Which  I  have  kept  a  painefull  sojourner 
In  my  unquiet  bosome. 

Win.  'Twas  your  owne  tyranny 
To  adde  to  my  injunction,  I  crav'd 
But  one  moneth,  and  you  would  proffer  three. 

Hugh.    'Twas  folly  in  my  duty.  40 


2o8  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Win.    Which  still  you  doe  persist  in, 

For  since  you  left  me  I  am  contract  and  wedded. 
Hugh.    Am  I  out  rivald  ? 
Win.    War  not  with  heaven  sir, 

To  that  is  ty'd  my  Nuptiall  Gordion, 

Within  yon  house  of  starres  the  Bride-groome  sits, 
45  And  there  the  Spousall  chamber  is  prepard, 

You  are  the  golden  Himeneall  flames, 

Whose  spherick  Musicke,  chast  Hallelujahs  sing, 

To  celebration  of  my  Virgin  rights : 

Oh  labour  not  then  to  divorce  me  thence, 
SO  Since  all  the  fruit  will  be  but  vaine  expence : 

My  love  is  fixt,  and  we  have  but  one  love; 

You  seeke  for  that  below  that's  gone  above. 
Hugh.    You  are  too  obstinate: 
Win.    O  chide  your  selfe  sir, 

'Tis  your  owne  sin,  you  are  too  obstinate 
55  To  persevere  against  a  decree  of  Fate : 

Be  this  the  finall  answer  to  your  suite ; 

If  ever  mortall  man  have  attribute 

Of  Winifreds  Husband,  't  shall  be  Sir  Hugh, 

If  it  be  debt  to  any  'tis  your  due. 
60      Hugh.     A  desperate  debt,  hopelesse  of  recovery. 
Win.    And  as  the  test  to  your  faire  seeming  love. 

Whether  it  Noble  were  or  counterfeit. 

By  its  best  vertue  here  I  charge  you  Sir, 

To  move  no  further  questions  at  this  time, 
65  For  if  you  speake  I  will  not  answer  you ; 

You  may  in  silence  stay: 

Thus  doe  I  turne  setting  the  world  a  part. 

Here  fixe  mine  eyes,  and  with  mine  eyes  my  heart. 
Hugh.    Thou  gilded  poyson,  my  tongue  is  silent, 
70  But  my  unquiet  thoughts  will  still  take  leave, 

To  thinke  of  thy  perverse  unkind  disdaine ; 

He  thinke  thee  peevish,  and  blame  all  thy  Sects 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  209 

For  thy  self e  sin,  for  thou  wert  all  to  me ; 

Vanish  all  State,  and  Wales  bow  to  the  yoke 

Of  Tyrants  servitude,  noe  defensive  stroake  75 

Shall  this  Arme  lift  to  save  me  from  thy  thrale : 

Rest  there  regardlesse  honour,  and  take  a  fall 

Before  thy  pride;  hence  forth  some  humble  meane. 

That  will  afford  but  merit  to  my  paine, 

Shall  be  my  lives  trafificke,  lie  never  mind  80 

This,  or  too  fickle,  or  too  cruell  kind. 

But  thus  conclude,  for  thee  I  prove  accurst, 

Extreame  in  both,  thou  art  both  best  and  worst.  Exit  Hugh. 

Enter  Amphiahell. 

Win.    Who's  there  ?^  Amphiabell? 

'Am.    Yes  vertuous  Lady. 

Win.    Thou  abidest  still.  85 

Am.    To  death: 
Christians  tire  not  till  they  be  out  of  breath; 
Life  labours  here,  at  death  the  wage  doth  come. 
Which  Tyrants  pay  in  Crownes  of  Martyrdome. 

Enter  BassianuSj  Lutio,  and  Romans. 

Bass.    We  forage  unresisted:  soft  who  are  these? 
Lut.    Ceaze  first,  and  then  examine.  90 

Am.    Two,  that  will  neither  fly,  nor  resist  your  force. 
Bass.    Then  you  will  surely  dye  Amphiabell. 
Am.    Yes. 

Bass.     And  the  holy  Virgin. 
Win.    So,  unhappy  Tyrant. 

Bass.     The  Triumphs  of  our  Wars;  here  persuite  shall 
stay, 
In  your  surprise  we  have  atchiev'd  the  day.  95 

'Texts,  "Whose  there  Am?" 


2IO  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Win.    Ring  out  your  triumphs  loude,  tis  a  large  boast, 
You  have  gain'd  much,  and  we  have  nothing  lost. 

Bass.    Thou  art  a  traytor  Capitall  to  Rome, 
From  whence  thy  knightly  honors  were  deriv'd, 
lOO  'Twas  thy  seditious  heresie  that  wrought 
The  wracke  of  honor'd  Albon,  even  this  Lady 
Hast  thou  seduc'd,  a  mercifuU  sommons 
Now  cals  his  last  to  thee,  turne  unto  Rome, 
And  worship  give  unto  our  Golden  gods. 
105      Am.     No,  I  will  not;  when  I  crave  mercy,  give  it. 
Win.     Thou  debuty  tyrant,  this  place  is  hallowed; 
Doe  not  awake  the  thunder,  if  it  strike. 
The  boult  will  fall  downe  perpendicular, 
And  strike  thee  under  mercy. 
Bass.    Ha,  ha,  ha; 
1 10  What  pretty  dreames  these  Christians  apprehend : 
They  say  your  well  is  very  Soveraigne 
To  cure  the  itch,  I  have  got  a  scab,  to  day 
He  try  the  vertue  of  your  Virgin  water, 

{Lut.l     'Tis  good  for  sore  eyes  too,  ist  not?  mine  are 
some  thing  Rhumaticke.     [Bathes  his  eyes.] 
115      Win.    Doe,  play  with  Lightning  till  it  blasts  thee. 
Lut.    Oh !  here's  hell,  witchcraft,  my  eyes  are  lost, 
This  sorcerous  poole  hath  tane  away  my  sight : 
Witch  He  find  thee  out,  and  breake  thy  Magicke, 
By  drawing  of  thy  blood.     [Strikes  Bassianus.] 
Bass.    Has  wounded  me. 
120      Win.    'Lay  hold  upon  him,  hee'le  doe  more  mischeife  else. 
Lut.    Guide  me  to  the  divill. 
Win.    Thou  art  going  right  blind-fold. 
Hold  fast  his  hands,  I  will  be  charitable 
Unto  my  persecutors :  now  see  the  change, 
Vertue,  abus'd  turnes  unto  damage  more, 
125  By  helpe  of  heaven  thus  I  thine  eyes  restore. 
Lut.    Ha,  is't  day  agen? 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  211 

Win.     Wilt  thou  understand  from  whence  thy  succour 
comes  ? 

Lut.    From  Apollo,  and  lupiter,  the  gods  of  Rome, 
Who  would  not  see  a  witch  abuse  their  creature. 
Away  with  her  to  th'  fire;^  till  she  be  burnt  and  dead,  130 

Mine  eyes  will  stand  in  feare  within  my  head. 

Baiss.    Let  them  be  garded  unto  Verolome, 
Where  first  they  shall  behold  the  dreadfull  sufferings 
Of  revolted  Albon,  as  you  looke  on,  and  see 
His  tortures  please,  follow  destruction.  135 

Win.    Come  constant  friend,  now  comes  the  wished  day, 
The  path  to  blisse  is  through  a  thorny  way.  Exeunt. 


[Act  III.     Scene  2.] 

[  The  Shoemaker's  Shop.  ] 
Enter  with  a  Trumpet,  RutuUus,  Shoo-m^ker,  and  his  Wife. 

Shoo.    One  out  of  my  house  my  Lord  ?    I  am  the  Princes 
Shoo-maker, 
Will  not  that  excuse  me? 

Rut.    My  Commission's  strict,  let  me  see  your  house-hold. 

Shoo.    I  know  not  which  to  part  with  beleeve  me  sir. 
But  you  shall  see  them  all,  Ralph,  Barnaby,  Crispinus,  5 

Crispianus,  appeare  my  boyes.* 

Enter  Ralph  and  Crispianus. 

Shoo.  Looke,  here's  most  of  my  store. 

Rut.  The  worst  of  these  will  serve;  but  here's  not  all. 

Shoo.  Barnaby,  where's  Barnaby? 

Wife.  That  Knave  will  still  be  backward :  why  Barnaby.  10 

*Texts  have  no  punctuation  here. 
'Texts  end  with  a  question  mark. 


212  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Enter  Barnaby,  with  a  Kercher  on. 

Bar.    Oh,  oh,  oh. 

Shoo.    Why  how  now  Barnaby,  what  falne  sicke  o'  th' 
sudden  Barnaby? 

[Bar.]     Oh  Master,  I  have  such  a  singing  in  my  head, 
15  my  toes  are  crampt  too. 

Shoo.    What  from  head  to  foot  already,  where  lyes  thy 

paine  ? 
Bar.*     Here,  here  about  my  heart  Master  I  have  an  Issue 
here  too, 
Oh  Master,  if  you  did  but  feele  what  a  breath  comes  out, 
You  would  stop  your  nose  in't. 
20      Wife.     Come,  come,  you  are  a  lazy  knave,  you  must  be 
prest  for  a  Souldier. 
Bar.     Oh  dame.  He  confesse  and  be  hang'd  rather  then 
He  bee  prest. 

Cris.    The  Drums  and  Trumpets  will  revive  thee  man. 
Bofr.    Alas,  if  I  heare  any  noise  I'me  a  dead  man. 
25      Shoo.    Ralph,  what  sayst  thou,  wilt  thou  serve  the  King? 
Ral.     I  cannot  serve  a  better  Master  if  the  King  does 
entertaine  me,  He  doe  him  the  best  service  that  I  can. 

Cris.    I  beseech  you,  sir  let  me  excuse  the  rest : 
I  have  a  mind  to  meet  a  foe  i'  th  field, 
30  Meethinks  I  could  performe  some  worthy  act. 
That  at  my  backe  retume,  you  should  be  proud 
To  say  my  Servant  did  it. 

Shoo.    Yee,  saist  thou  so  boy  ?    I  like  thy  f orwardnesse. 
But  I'de  be  loath  to  leese  thee  yet. 
35      Wife.     Alas  man  the  boy  is  yong,  his  tender  limbes 
Are  scarce  well  joynted  yet,  let  Ralph,  or  Barnaby, 
Undertake  that  taske,  'tis  fitter  for  either. 

Baxr.    Oh  a  little  aqua-composita :  good  dame, 
I  have  a  quaking  ague  come  upon  me. 

'Texts  give  this  line  to  the  shoemaker. 


A  Shoa-maker  a  Gentleman  213 

Wife.    A  f eaver  lurden  have  you  not  ?  you  lazy  knave  you,  40 
Wilt  thou  let  a  boy  out  dare  thee  ? 

Cris.    Good  dame  perswade  him  not  against  his  heart, 
Such  brave  designes  as  Souldiers  undergoe, 
Should  not  be  forc'd,  but  free  and  voluntary. 
A  Coward  in  a  Campe  more  spoyles  an  Army  45 

By  faint  example  of  his  frozen  blood, 
Than  a  full  Squadron  of  the  daring'st  foes 
Surprizing  at  advantage. 

Rut.    A  forward  spirit, 
Such  a  faire  promise  cannot  want  performance: 
Thou  shalt  be  my  choise ;  accept  thy  presse-money,  50 

And  for  the  hopes  that  I  expect  from  thee, 
Thy  Ranke  shall  not  be  common. 

Wife.     Alack,  alack,  the  Boy  is  forward,  but  farre  un- 
able; Sir  pray  spare  him,  and  take  either  of  these. 

Bar.    Oh,  I  have  a  stitch  in  my  Elbow  here;  a  little  Par-  55 
macadius. 

Wife.     A  false  stitch  I  warrant  thee,  the  Warres  will 
pick  it  out. 

Shoo.     Peace  Sisley;  Boy,  since  thou  art  so  forward, 
I  will  not  stay  the  freedome  of  thy  spirit; 
So  I  might  hinder  thee  fro-m  better  hopes 
Than  my  poore  substance  could  endow  thee  with :  60 

Goe,  and  good  Fortune  keepe  thee  company; 
If  thou  retum'st,  thou  shalt  be  welcome  still. 
I  must  be  willing  though  against  my  will. 
To  leave  thee  Boy. 

Wife.     And  welcome  shalt  thou  be  to  thy  Dame  boy;  if  (55 
there  come  but  a  leg  on  thee  back,  the  worst  member  thou 
hast,  shall  be  welcome  to  me;  lame  or  blind,  if  thou  comm'st 
back,  thou  shalt  want  no  Hospitall-pention  as  long  as  I  live. 

Shoo.    Gramercy  for  that  Sis;  He  sell  all  the  shooes  in 
my  Shop 
Before  my  lame  Souldier  shall  be  kept  in  an  Hospitall.  70 


214  -^  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Crispia.    Your  loves  are  Parent-like,  not  as  to  a  servant, 
But  a  child :  the  Heavens  in  safety  keepe  you ; 
My  prayers  in  duty  shall  be  here  at  home, 
When  my  bodie's  distant.     I  beseech  you  Sir, 
75  Commend  me  to  my  Brother :  Raph,  Barnaby  farewell. 

Bar.     Farewell  good  Crispian.     I  shall  never  see  thee 

more. 
Crispia.    Tush,  feare  not;  nay,  if  e're  I  doe  returne, 
He  bring  home  stories  that  we'le  turne  to  Meeter, 
&  sing  away  our  work  with  'em. 
Bar.     Farewell  Crispianus. 
80      Crispia.    Master  and  Dame,  once  more  I  bid  farewell, 
'Tis  brave  to  dye  where  Trumpets  ring  the  Knell. 

Rut.     Come  Crispianus.  [Exit  with  Crispianus.] 

Wife.    Well,  goe  thy  wayes,  and  take  the  kindest  youth 
with  thee,  that  e're  -set  foot  in  the  stirrup. 
85      Shoo.     How  now  Barnaby,  art  any  thing  better  yet? 
Bar.     I  am  somewhat  better  than  I  was  Master;  I  doe 
begin  to  feele  my  selfe  better  and  better. 

Wife.    Oh  you  are  a  cunning  counterfeit  knave  sirrah. 

Bar.    O  Mistresse,  there  is  alwayes  policy  in  Warres  as 

90  well  as  blowes :  if  it  be  good  sleeping  in  a  whole  skinne,  it 

must  needs  be  bad  sleeping  in  a  broken  one;  and  he  that 

cannot  sleepe  well,  it  is  a  signe  he  cannot  drinke  well ;  and  he 

that  does  not  drinke  well,  never  digests  his  meate  well ;  and 

he  that  digests  not  his  meate  well,  'tis  a  signe  he  has^  not  a 

95  good  stomack ;  and  hee  that  has®  not  a  good  stomacke,  is 

not  fit  for  the  Warres.     I  did  thinke  it  better  to  stay  at 

home  truely  Master. 

Shoo.     The  end  is,  thou  hadst  rather  worke  than  fight 
Boy: 
I  had  rather  thou  shou'dst  too: 
100  But  I  wonder  I  heare  not  of  Crispinus  yet. 

Wife.     Truely  man  I  am  affraid  hee's  prest  at  Canter- 
bury. 

Texts,  "h'as,"  a  contraction  for  "he  has,"  obviously  out  of  place  here. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  215 

Enter  Crispinus. 

Crisp.    All  the  way  'twixt  this  and  Canterbury 
Will  not  afford  me  an  excuse  sufificient 
For  tarrying  so  long  out  of  my  Masters  house : 
The  truth  I  dare  not  tell,  'twere  better  lye  105 

Than  confesse  my  lying  with  the    Emperors  Daughter, 
Though  the  case  be  honest,  being  my  Wife : 
Well,  somewhat  it  must  be,  I  know  not  what  yet; 
If  I  endure  a  rough  chiding  for  my  paines, 
It  is  but  sawce  to  sweete  meates.  no 

Shoo.     Looke,  looke  Wife,  hee's  come:  why  how  now 
Crispinus, 
How  comes  it  you  have  stayd  so  long? 

Wife.    O  you  are  a  fine  loytering  youth,  what,  lye  out  of 
your  Masters  house ! 

Crisp.     Your  pardon  once  good  Dame,  I  was  in  no  bad  nS 

company. 
Wife.     Who  knows  that  sir?  you   frighted  both  your 
Master  &  me ; 
We  thought  you  had  beene  prest  for  a  Souldier,     as  your 
Brother  is. 
Crisp.     [Aside.]     So  now  my  Dame  has^  helpt  me  to  an 
excuse : 
[Aloiid.]      Why  truely  Dame  that  was  my  feare;  I  was 

faine  to  shroud 
My  selfe  in  the  Court  all  night  for  feare  of  the  presse.        120 
Shoo.     Nay  then  'twas  wel  done  Boy,  I  wou'd  not  have 

lost  thee  too. 
Wife.     I,  I,  the  flower's  pluckt,  but  the  weed  remaines ; 
Thy  brother  that's  gone,  would  not  ha\'«  serv'd  me  so. 
Shoo.     Peace  good  Eve,  no  more  words,  the  excuse  is 

honest. 
Wife.    I,  I,  you'le  marre  'em  all :  but  he  had  better  beene  125 

Texts,  "ih'as." 


2i6  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

a  sleepe  in  his  bed,  than  tarryed  out  of  his  Masters  house 
to  vexe  me  thus. 

Cris.    Nay,  not  so  Dame;  I  had  better  lodging  by  your 

leave. 
Bar.    Ey,  ey ;  he  had  better  beene  sick  in  his  bed  as  I  was, 
130  Than  anger  my  Dame  I  warrant  him. 

Shoo.     Why  how  now  Barnaby,  throw  pitch  i'  th'  fire? 
no  more  words : 
I  say,  He  be  his  baile,  he  shall  offend  no  more  so. 

Crisp.     Doe  not  Master,  I  shal  damnifie  my  baile. 
And  do  so  agen  I'me  affraid. 
135      Wife.     Thou  shalt  doe  under-worke  for't;  thou  shalt 
make  nothing  but  childrens  shooes  this  halfe  yeere. 

Cris.    I  beleeve  I  have  made  worke  for  Childrens  shooes 

already. 
Shoo.     Medle  with  my  Shop  Avant, 
Cadua,  hue  spectit  tua  cura  mundare  cacabum; 
140  Goe  looke  to  your  Kitchin,  let  me  alone  with  my  Prentises. 
Wife.     1,  let  you  alone,  and  your  bond  servants  will  be 
all  laxative  one  of  these  dales,  if  you  let  'em  loose  in  this 
fashion.    What  will  you  say  if  this  young  Rogue  has  beene 
a  wenching  to  night  ?    Some  overdone  thing  or  other  makes 
14s  velvet  of  his  black  browes. 

Bar.  I  beleeve  so  too  Dame;  for  the  old  Gentlewoman 
that  waits  upon  my  Lady,  will  have  no  body  now  adaies  to 
pull  on  her  shooes  but  hee. 

Shoo.    Yet  agen  Barnaby?    Why  Lady  D'Oliva,  who's 

1 50  controuler  of  my   Houshold  ?  have   I   not  paid   for  my 

breeches,  are  they  not  mine  owne,  and  shall  I  not  ware 

'em?    My  Boy  Crispinus  shall  arest  his  Dame  Sisley  for 

an  action  of  slander:  he  goe  awenching? 

Cris.    No  by  my  faith,  'tis  past  that  Master; 
155  Master  and  Dame,  let  me  excuse  my  selfe, 
Not  to  glosse  o're  the  fault  I  have  committed. 
But  with  a  promise  to  offend  no  more; 
Nor  if  your  patience  might  censure  me, 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  217 

Could  I  be  much  blam'd  for  it,  seeing  it  was 

The  Princesse  pleasure  that  inforc't  my  stay,  160 

Who  likewise  hath  enjoyn'd  me  to  returne 

Agen  to  night. 

Shoo.    No  more,  thy  peace  is  made :  how  now,  what's  he  ? 

Enter  Sir  Hugh 

Hugh.    A  poore  man  Sir,  one  that  would  be  proud  to  call 
you  Master. 

Shoo.    Ey,  canst  thou  be  poore  and  proud  too?  thou  art  165 
no  shooe-maker  then  ? 

Hugh.    Not  yet  Sir ;  I  would  be  glad  to  learne. 

Bar.  No  Sir,  an  you  be  poore  and  proud  too,  you  are 
fitter  for  a  Tayler  than  a  Shooe-maker. 

Wife.    Had  you  come  a  little  sooner  sir,  you  might  have 
had  entertainment,  and  excus'd  a  pretty  youth  that's  prest  170 
to  serve  the  King  in  his  Warres  :  thou  art  well-limb'd. 

Hugh.    Alas,  that  were  to  throw  me  backe  to  woe 
I  have  but  lately  scap't  from:  'twas  the  Warres 
That  thus  hath  ruin'd  me,  and  for  I  know 
Those  dangerous  quick-sands,  I  had  rather  saile  ^75 

In  some  freer  sea-roome,  any  paines 
That  might  afiford  me  pension  for  my  life, 
I  would  doe  double  labour  for  my  hire 
If  I  might  have  imployment. 

Shoo.    What  Countreyman? 

Hugh.    Wales  is  my  Countrey,  my  name  is  Hugh.  180 

Bar.  I  have  some  Cozens  in  your  Countrey :  you  know 
Penvenmower,  Blew  Morrice  Laugathin,  Aberginenni 
Terdawhee,  Saint  Davis  Harpe,  and  the  great  Organ  at 
Wricksom  ? 

Hugh.    There's  not  a  cragge  beyond  the  Seveme  flood,     185 
But  I  have  held  against  the  Roman  Foes, 
Till  odds  and  losse  of  blood  expell'd  me  thence : 
Nor  was  I  ever  first  forsooke  the  field ; 
But  I  doe  vaine  to  boast. 


2i8  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

190      Shoo.    Thou  art  a  Christian  then? 
Hugh.    It  was  my  quarrell  Sir. 
Bar.    And  you  are  a  Gentleman  I'me  sure. 
Hugh.    I  am  a  Welch-man  Sir. 

Bar.    Nay  then  thou  canst  not  choose  but  be  a  Gentleman. 

Shoo.    And  how  dare  you  thou  a  Gentleman  sirrah  ? 

5or.    Yes,  a  poore  Gentleman  alwayes,  so  long  as  he  dares 

195  not  take  exceptions.     Pray  you  Master  entertaine  him,  that 

wee  may  have  a  Gentleman  of  our  Trade :  he  may  (Lord 

blesse  us)  live  to  be  Major  of  Feversham. 

Wife.    I  sir,  you  are  ready  still  to  heape  on  more  charges. 

Shoo.      More  Lawyers  weapons,  more  Tongue- worke : 

200  Sisley,  thou  shalt  entertaine  him.    Thou  Gentleman,  as  thou 

art  a  Souldier,  and  a  good  fellow,  when  th'art  a  Shooemaker 

I  bid  thee  welcome  to  Feversham:  Crispianus  is  gone,  and 

thou  shalt  be  his  heire. 

Crisp.     [Aside.]    Twere  worth  a  Kingdome  if  he  had  his 
due  then. 
205      Wife.    By  the  faith  of  my  upper  bodies,  and  the  honesty 
of  my  neather  skirts,  but  he  shall  not  stay  there  a  while ;  his 
Brother  Crispinus  shall  have  that  place. 

Cris.     I  thanke  you  Dame,  [aside.]  if  he  dye  issuelesse, 

'tis  my  inheritance. 
Hugh.     I  will  be  so  obedient  unto  all, 
210  That  every  servant  shall  be  my  second  Master. 

Bar.  Well  Cozen  Hugh,  I  will  doe  my  best  to  instruct 
thee:  but  you  must  take  heed  there  be  no  Turky-cocks  in 
your  worke. 

Hugh.    When  I  understand  the  English  Sir,  He  observe 
you. 
215      Bar.    Your  Turky-cock  is  as  much  as  to  say,  Coble,  coble, 
coble ;  you  must  take  heed  of  cobling. 

Shoo.    Come  on  good  fellow,  He  teech  thee  a  good  Trade : 
A  Gentleman,  if  he  want  better  meanes, 
May  live  well  by  it ;  and  this  He  promise  thee 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  219 

After  some  tearme  of  yeeres  to  make  thee  free :  220 

Or  if  thou  dye,  and  that's  a  Christians  best 

He  see  thy  bones  laid  quietly  to  rest.  Exeunt. 


[Act  III.    Scene  3. J 

[A  Battlefield  in  France.  ] 

Enter  Dioclcsimi,  the  Eagle  borne  before  him  at  one  doore, 
at  the  other,  Hiddrick  and  Rodrick,  Kings  of  the  Goths 
and  Vandalls,  with  their  Army. 

Diocle.    Advance  the  Roman  Eagle,  and  command 
Our  armed  Legions  to  troope  close,  and  stand. 

Rod.    The  Romans  are  in  sight,  Drummes  beate  a  parley. 

Diocle.    Death  blurre  their  parley, 
Wee'le  not  answer  the  tliunder  of  their  Drummes :  5 

Our  Eagle  shall  not  nesell  by  base  Ravens, 
But  to  peck  out  their  eyes ;  our  Swords  shall  answer 
The  Thunder  of  their  Drummes,  the  Roman  Caesar 
Holds  scome  to  parley  with  such  servile  Nations, 
As  you  the  barbarotis  Vandalls  and  Goths,  10 

Poore  frozen  Snakes,  that  from  the  Northenie  cold 
Creepe  to  the  warmth  of  the  Sunnes  Westerne  fires, 
Troubling  our  fertile  Lands,  and  like  starv'd  sheepe, 
You  spoyle  the  Countries  with  a  line  you  keepe 
In  Regions  beggerly.  15 

Hul.    Dioclesian,  heare  me. 

Diocle.    What  croakes  the  Raven? 

Hul.    Proud  Roman  this  :  if  here  thou  longer  stay, 
Hee'le  peck  thine  Eagles  eyes  out,  make  thee  a  prey 
To  his  steme  Gripe,  whose  dismall  beake  now  sings 
The  sudden  ruine  20 

Diocle.    Of  two  barbarous  Kings. 


220  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Rod.    Insulting  Tyrant,  stop  thy  scandalous  breath, 

Thy  blood  shall  finde  us  Kings  and  Souldiers  both : 

We  are  a  swelling  Sea,  and  our  owne  Bankes,^ 

Not  large  enough  to  bound  us,  are  broke  forth 
25  Like  a  resistlesse  Torrent  to  o'rewhelme 

And  drowne  in  blood  all  Nations  that  withstand  us. 

Thou  seest  already  Germany  is  ours; 

So  shall  faire  France  be,  at  least  those  parts  that  lye 

Upon  the  Rhine,  and  fertile  Burgundy: 
30  Which  if  thou  grant  before  the  Battailes  joyne. 

We  will  retire,  and  league  with  thee  and  Rome. 
Diode.    Ha,  ha,  ha ; 

Must  Lyons  be  inforc'd  to  league  with  Wolves  ? 
Hul.    If  thou  deny  it,  by  the  glorious  Sunne, 
35  And  all  the  Deities  our  men  adore, 

Wee'le  forage  up  to  Rome  and  Italy, 

And  sit  in  tryumph  in  your  Capitol : 

The  Vandals  and  the  Goaths  shall  carve  their  fames 

As  deepe  as  now  the  Romans  doe  their  Names : 
40  Raise  up  as  many  Trophies,  and  as  high. 

In  brazen  pillars  of  their  victory. 
Diode.    Poore  Flies,  behold  the  Eagle,  and  give  o're; 

Strive  not  to  cope  with  strength  beyond  your  power, 

For  us  she  spreads  her  wings  as  farre  and  bright, 
45  As  in  a  Day  the  Sunne  rides  with  his  light, 

And  that's  the  universall  Globe  of  Earth : 

Europa's^  proud  throat  we  tread  on : 

Affrick  and  Asia  our  Eagles  talents  gripe, 

The  Lords  of  Rome  fadome  both  Land  and  Deepe. 
50      Rod.    New  Lords  new  Lawes  renew, 

As  you  of  others,  wee'le  be  Lords  of  you. 

Diode.  Wee'le  heare  no  more ;  call  up  the  Brittaine  Soul- 
diers 

'Texts,  "Barkes." 
Texts,  "Europos." 


A  Sh^oo-maker  a  Gentleman  221 

Our  Brother  Maximinus  sent  unto  our  aide, 

Let  'em  begin  the  battell,  fight  Hke  Romans : 

Remember  this,  your  enemies  are  base;  55 

Let  your  Swords  worke  like  Sithes  confound  these  swarmes. 

And  sweepe  these  Locusts  hence  with  conquering  Armes. 

Exeunt. 

[Act  in.     Scene  4.] 
[The  Same.l 

Alarum.  Enter  Roderick  and  Huldrick  with  Souldiers  at 
one  doore,  at  the  other,  Crispiamis  and  Brittaines,  fight 
and  drive  off  the  Vandals. 

Enter  Roderick  and  Huldrick. 

Rod.    These  Romans  fight  like  devils. 

Hul.    Spirits  inf ernall  could  not  charge  so  hotly ; 
Disgrac't  i'  th'  onset :  Counsell  Roderick, 
What's  to  be  done  ?  our  men  flye,  not  able  to  endure  'em. 

Rod.    Knit  all  our  Nerves  in  one ;  renowned  Huldricke      5 
Hye  to  thy  Troopes,  and  with  thy  valiant  Goths 
Assaile  the  Romans  in  their  hinmost  Flankes, 
And  breake  into  their  maine  Battalia ; 
Whilst  here  I  stay,  and  hold  the  Brittaines  play. 

Hul.    I  like  it  well ;  divided  Armes  thrive  best,  10 

This  day  weele  climbe  the  lofty  Eagles  nest.  Exit. 

Enter  Dioclesian. 

Dioc.    Turne  thee  base  Vandal. 
Rod.    Roman  'tis  thee  I  seeke. 

Dioc.    And  thou  hast  found  mee ;  He  teach  thee  speake 
The  Roman  Language. 

Rod.    And  thou  shalt  learne  from  me 


222  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

15  The  Art  of  Warre,  and  Discipline  of  Armas 
The  Vandals  teach. 

Dioc.    A  Fencer  tis  agreed. 
The  Schoole  tricke  thou  shalt  learne  at  first  blow.    Alarum. 

Rodericke  hath  Dioclesian  downe:  Crispianus  fights  with 
Rodericke  and  rescues  him;  and  beates  off  Rodericke. 

Dioc.    What  art  thou  that  hast  saved  me  ? 
Cris.    A  Souldier :  What  art  thou  so  saved  ? 
Dioc.    An  Emperour. 
20      Cris.     Thou  art  saved  then  by  a  Warlike  Brittaine  soul- 
dier: 
And  had  I  as  many  lives  as  drops  of  blood, 
I'de  spend  them  all  to  doe  great  Caesar  good. 

Dioc.    I  thanke  thee :  follow  thy  fortunes,  and  goe  on ; 
The  gods  of  Rome  sit  on  thy  weapon  still : 
25  The  battaile  ended,  see  me  in  my  Tent. 

Cris.    I  will.  Exit. 

Dioc.    Immortall  gods !    How  crept  a  Kingly  spirit 
Into  a  breast  so  low !    How  now,  how  goes  the  day  ? 

Enter  a  Roman. 
Rom.     Bloody   and    dismall;   Huldrick   King   of   Groths 
Q  Entred  our  Ranks,  and  like  a  Whirlewinde,  sweepes, 
And  beates  downe  our  maine  Battalia,  seizing  by  force 
The  Roman  Eagle. 
Dioc.    How  Traitor? 

Rom.    Beleeve  it  sir  'tis  lost,  and  now  in  triumph 
O're  his  Plume  she  claps  her  wings  on  high, 
,-  With  ecchoing  shout  of  present  victory. 

Dioc.    The  Roman  gods  forbid :  Let  a  Trumpet 
Call  up  the  Britains  to  recover  it.  Exit  [soldi^]. 

Enter  Huldrick e  King  of  Goihes  [and  soldiers']. 

Hut.    Yeeld  thee  proud  Roman,  the  sable  Ravens  plume 
Hath  strooke  thy  Eagle  blinde,  and  blasted  Rome. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  223 

Dioc.    Hand  off,®  thou  barbarous  slave; 
I  still  can  boast  my  state's  Imperiall.  40 

Hul.    Tut,  that  Title's  lost,  thou  art  now 
Within  my  power:  \_to  a  soldier.]  flye  to  King  Rodericke, 
And  glad  his  eares  with  newes  of  what  you  see, 
And  with  our  Drummes  proclaime  the  victory. 

Enter  Crispianus  with  Eagle  and  Souldiers. 

Cris.    Base  Goth  looke  up,  and  see  45 

Here  hovers  Eagle  winged  victory, 
Recoverd  from  thy  troopes. 

Hul.     S'death  lost  agen. 

Dioc.     Fight  Warlike  Brittaines,  free  your  Emperour. 

Cris.    We  shall,  or  dye  : 
This  holds  the  Goths  death ;  this  thy  liberty.  50 

Alarum:    Crispianus  fights  with  his  sword  in  one  Jiand,  and 

the  Eagle  in  the  other:  he  kills  Huldricke, 

and  frees  Dioclesian. 

Dioc.    Twice  is  my  life  indebted  to  thy  valour : 
Admired  Souldier,  if  I  winne  the  day, 
Never  had  Brittaine  Souldier  such  a  pay 
As  thou  shalt  have. 

Cris.    Talke  not  of  debts,  or  pay,  let's  hence  and  fight;       55 
As  long  as  I  have  breath  He  hold  your  right. 
Souldiers  troope  close,  our  taske  is  not  yet  done ; 
He  keepe  your  Eagle  till  the  battaile's  wonne. 

Dioc.     Keepe  it  with  fame. 

Crisp.    Even  to  my  latest  breath.  Exit. 

Dioc.    The  glory's  thine,  thou  hast  sav'd  me  twice  from  60 
death.  [Exit.] 


Texts,  "of."     No  comma. 


224  ^  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

[Act  III.    Scene  5.J 
[The  Samte.] 
'Alarum:  a  shout  within:  Enter  Rodericke  and  Vandals. 

Rod.    This  Brittaines  are  all  Divells, 
And  amongst  them  there's  one  master  Divell, 
That  beares  the  face  of  a  base  Common  souldier ; 
Yet  on  his  homes  he  tosseth  up  our  Vandals. 
5  Now,  what  Newes?  Enter  a  Captaine. 

Cap:    Rodericke  flye,  and  save  thy  life ; 
Huldrick  the  King  of  Goths  is  slaine. 

Rod.    I  out  goe  him  in  life,  he  me  in  fame : 
In  spight  weele  after  him  with  glorious  wings, 
A  bloody  field  is  a  brave  Tombe  for  Kings. 
10      Cap.    Hazard  not  all  at  one  cast,  since  you  see 
The  Dice  runnes  high  against  yee ;  but  give  way. 
See  not  the  board  when  you  see!  fortune  play : 
Winning  the  maine.^"    No  safety  'tis  to  fight. 

Rod.    How  then? 

Cap.    Over  the  Rhine  my  Lord  make  speedy  flight ; 
15  The  wheele  of  Chance  may  turne,  and  the  dice  runne 
For  us  to  get,  what  now  our  foes  have  wonne. 

A  shout  within:  Enter  Crispianus  and  the  rest,  driving  oW 

the  Vandals:  he  takes  Rodericke  prisoner;  a  retreat 

sounded:  Enter  Dioclesian  with  victory. 

Crisp.    Now  to  the  Royall  hand  of  Caesar  I  resigne 
The  high  Imperiall  Ensigne  of  great  Rome  ; 
And  with  it,  this  wilde  tusked  Boare,  the  stubborne  Vandall, 
20  Snar'd  in  the  toyles,  and  conquerd  by  this  sword ; 
I  could  have  serv'd  his  head  up  at  your  board  : 

"Texts  have  no  punctuation  or  capital. 


A  Shao^maker  a  Gentleman  225 

But  since  for  glory,  more  than  blood  we  strive, 
I'de  rather  have  a  Lyon  tane  alive. 

Dioc.    Noble  thou  art,  as  valiant,  and  this  day 
Thy  onely  sword  the  greater  halfe  hath  wonne,  25 

And  we  must  pay  thy  merits.    Whats  thy  name? 

Crisp.    Crispianus  sir. 

Dioc.    Of  what  birth  or  fortunes. 

Crisp.     You  may  reade  them  here,  writ  on  my  bosome  sir : 
A  common  Souldier, 

Yet  were  my  Parents  good  and  generous,  30 

They  dead,  and  I  downe  sinking  in  my  state, 
As  others  doe,  I  swore  to  crosse  the  Fate 
That  crossed  me:  and  when  all  hopes  else  did  fade, 
I  got  my  living  by  an  honest  trade : 

A  Shooe-maker  my  Lord,  where  merrily,  35 

With  frolicke  mates,  I  spent  my  dayes,  till  when. 
Being  prest  to  warres  amongst  my  Countrey-men, 
Hither  I  came,  and  here  my  prize  is  playd. 
For  Brittaines  honour,  and  my  Masters  trade: 
This  Vandall  is  my  Prisoner :  f rowne  not  sir,  40 

Great  lookes  can  nere  put  downe  a  Shooe-maker. 

Rod.     Your  fortune  rises  sir,  and  I  must  bow: 
I  was  nere  i'th  Shooemakers  stockes  till  now. 

Dioc.     Renowned  Crispianus,  royall  thankes 
Shall  to  our  brother  Maximinus  flye,  45 

For  sending  such  a  Souldier.    Kneele  downe. 
And  rise  a  Brittaine  Knight; 
Hence  forth  beare  Armes  and  Shield; 
Thou  hast  won  thy  honour  truely  in  the  field. 
Besides  our  gift,  the  ransome  of  this  King  50 

I  freely  give ;  and  that  thy  fame  may  sing 
A  lofty  note,  backe  to  thy  Countrey  lead 
These  Brittaine  Souldiers,  over  whom  I, make  thee  head; 
And  to  the  EmperoUr  Maximinus  thou  shalt  beare 
Such  Letters  from  bur  selfe,  as  he  shall  reare  55 


226  A  Shoo^maker  a  Gentleman 

And  swell  thine  honours,  and  when  we  in  France 

Have  laid  these  Whirle-windes  that  now  shake  the  State, 

Weele  crosse  the  seas  to  Brittaine  after  thee. 

Crisp.     The  gods  with  Garlands  crowne  thy  victory. 
60      Rod.    What  ransome  you  set  downe  He  truely  pay, 
And  draw^^  my  forces  backe  to  Germany, 
There  to  confine  our  selves;  the  Vandals  knee 
Now  humbly  bowes  to  th'  Roman  Emperie. 

Dioc.    And  that  obedience  Roderick  weele  imbrace. 
65  Lead  Crispianus  to  receive  the  Ransome : 

Vandall  and  Goths;  nay,  Rome  her  selfe  shall  sweare, 
She  never  met  so  brave  a  Shooe-maker. 

A  Flourish.     Ex^urtt. 

Actus  Quartus.     [Scene  i.J 

[A  Street  in  Canterbury.] 

Enter  Crispinus  and  Leodice  with  childe. 

Cris.    Be  comforted  my  deare  Leodice. 

Lead.    How  can  I  want  a  sweete  comfort,  having  thee? 
Alack,  that  pleasure  stolne,  being  backe  returnd, 
Should  taste  so  sower:  it  seemes  a  shallow  Ford, 
5  When  first  'tis  tride ;  but  when  the  depth  we  sound, 
It  is  a  gulfe  of  raging  whirle-pooles  found. 

Cris.     I  know  it  Princely  Love,  and  feare  the  event; 
Love  in  the  paths  of  danger  ever  went: 
The  morning  flames  of  our  desires  burne  bright, 
10  And  shall  doe  still  in  scome  of  fortunes  spight. 
If  you  but  feede  the  fire. 

Leod.     O  me!  'tis  this  I  feare, 
The  burthen  in  my  wombe  our  deaths  doe  beare. 

Cris.     Why  shouldst  thou  feare?*     The  knot  our  hearts 
hath  tide 

"Texts,  "drow." 
'  Texts  have  no  punctuation  here  and  a  question  mark  after  "tide." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  227 

Had  heavens  strength  to  it;  and  heaven  will  sure  provide 
For  those  whose  names  and  faiths  are  written  there.  15 

Leod.    What  vaile  can  now  be  drawne  to  hide  our  cares, 
Or  keep  this  secret  from  our  Fathers  eares. 
Of  our  stolne  marriage? 

Oris.    Stay,  lets  devise. 

Leod.     It  must  be  a  thicke  cloud  darkens  the  Sunne: 
This  day  my  Father  sits  to  cast  deaths  doome  20 

Upon  the  Christians :  and  that  doome  I  know.'' 
The  fruit  this  Land  brings  next,  must  be  my  woe. 

Cris.     I  prethee  peace,  the  clocke  of  misery 
Goes  alwaies  too  true :  yet  let  me  set  it  now. 

Leod.    Dearest  I  will.  25 

Cris.    Doe  this  then;  if  the  Emperour  call  for  thee. 
Be  sicke  and  keepe  thy  chamber, 
Untill  I  get  some  place  for  thy  delivery. 

Leod.     Sweare  to  me  one  thing  first. 

Cris.     What  ever  thou  desirest. 

Leod.     Then  as  thou  art  Princely  bred,  I  charge  thee  30 
sweare. 
That  as  above  the  world  I  hold  thee  deare. 
Thou  wilt  not    leave  me,  whatsoever  Thunder 
My  Father  throwes  at  thee :  kings  frownes  can  be  but  death : 
From  thee  He  never  part  unto  my  latest  breath. 

Cris.    By  all  the  truths  that  man  ere  swore  by,  35 

No  force  of  strength  shall  part  us. 

Leod.     Peace,  no  more, 
lie  aske  thee  pardon  for  this  base  mistrust : 
Kisse  thy  gentle  cheeke,  loving  and  mild : 
I  know  thou  canst  not  leave  thy  wife  and  child. 
O  me,  I  shall  forget  my  present  safety :  40 

Deare  heart  stand  by.    Nurse,  Who's  within  there?    Nurse. 

'  Texts  have  no  punctuation  here. 


228  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Enter  Nurse. 

Nurs.     Anon  sweet  mouse. 
Lead.     Sweet  honey  Nurse, 
If  the  Emperour  my  father  askes  for  me, 
Say  I  am  not  well,  and  keepe  my  chamber. 
45  You  Shooe-maker  a  word. 

Nurs.    [Aside.^    Yet  more  worke  for  your  Shooe-maker, 
well,  well, 
You  play  the  wagge,  and  I  the  lye  must  tell. 
I  feare  me  there's  a  shooe  wrings  her  i'th  instep,  of  my 
yong  Shooe-makers  making:  such  fellowes  as  hee  cannot 
50  chuse  but  bee  slippery  companions ;  'for  first  they  know  the 
length  of  a  Ladies  foote,  and  then  they  have  such  trickes 
to  smooth  her  shooe,  and  tickle  her  sole;  as  I  protest,  if  I 
were  a  Shooe-maker  my  selfe,   it  would  make  my  teeth 
water:  what  a  sweete  thing  it  is,  to  have  a  round  sweete, 
55  plumpe,  delicate  Calve  of  a  Ladies  legge  lye  roling  on  his 
thigh,  whilst  he  lies  smoothing  her  fine  silke  stocking,  slippes 
his  hand  to  her  garters,  and  sometimes  higher  by'r*  lady;  I 
have  beene  serv'd  so  my  selfe:  there's  many  a  Gallant,  I 
can  tell  you,  would  give  all  the  shooes  in's  shoppe  to  have 
60  a  shooe-makers  office  in  a  morning :  Well,  well,  I  say  noth- 
ing, but  I  suspect  something:  Pitty  of  me,  shee's  as  broad 
behinde  as  I  am,  and  round  enough  before:  I  doubt  me 
he  has  made  her  a  paire  of  short-heel'd  shooes  with  a  turne- 
over:  [aloud,']  Come  sweet  Mouse,  have  you  given  instruc- 
65  tions  to  your  Shooe-maker  ?    Why  what  a  fellow  art  thou, 
canst  not  finde  a  Last  to  fit  her  yet? 

Lead.    Yes  Nurse,  he  has  fitted  me  now. 
Nurse.    That's  well : 
You  must  be  carefull  sirrah,  you  must  take  true  measure, 
And  fit  her  to  a  haire,  I  charge  you. 
Cris.    I  warrant  you  Mistris. 

'Texts,  "bir." 


A  Skoo-maker  a  Gentleman  229 

Nwrse.     Mistris!  gods  me;  I  am  a  Madam  sir  knave,  70 
though  I  am  a  Nurse,  I  can  tell  you:  Goe  too,  learne  your 
duty,  and  you  shall  worke  to  me  too :  when  you  have  done 
with  my  Lady,  you  shall  take  up  my  legge  too :  Come  sweet 
honey.  Exit. 

Lead.    Adieu*  my  comfort.  [Exit.]  75 

Cris.    Even  so  my  heart  goes  from  me :  O  what  waves 
Swim  Lovers  in!  of  feares,  of  hopes,  of  cares. 
Of  discontents,  terrours,  and  dispaires. 
A  thousand  feares  doe  now  my  poore  heart  shake. 
What  medicine's  best  ?    Counsell,  and  that  He  take.  80 

Enter  Barnaby,  Raph,  and  Hugh. 

Bar.  Come,  come,  an  you  be  men,  make  haste:  you  'tis 
a  hanging  matter;  the  Emperour  and  all  the  Prisoners  are 
gone  by  already. 

Raph.  Stay,  stay,  here's  our  fellow  Crispin,  let's  take 
him  with  us.    Wilt  thou  goe  along  Crispin?  85 

Cris.  Whither  should  I  goe?  prethee  tell  me,  what  make 
you  all  at  Canterbury? 

Bar.  Not  to  buy  the  Cat  a  Bell  Crispin,  but  to  make 
loyter-pins.  For  this  day  Boy,  we  have  made  holy  at  Fever- 
sham,  shut  up  shop,  throwne  by  our  shooe-thred,  and  wash't  90 
our  faces :  and  now  my  Master  and  Dame,  and  all  of  us  are 
come  to  see  the  Emperour,  and  the  Christians  that  must 
dye  to  day.  They  say  there's  a  fine  young  Queene  amongst 
them :  prethee  goe  along  with  us. 

Cris.     In  sadnesse  I  cannot.  95 

Bar.     In  madnesse  now  I  care  not : 
For  our  shooes  are  made  of  running  lether, 
And  therefore  wee'le  gallop  no  man  knows  whether. 
Farewell  Crispine:  shalt  see  my  Dame  come  chaffing  this 

'Text.  "Adeu." 


230  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

100  away  anon,  'cause  we  ran  away  from  her:  Come  fellow 
Hugh,  thou  art  so  sad  now,  I  prethee  be  merry. 

Exit  Barnaby  and  Raph. 
Hugh.    He  follow  straight,  although  to  meet  my  ruine; 
The  Princesse  Winifred  is  doom'd  to  die, 
And  I  in  death  will  beare  her  company.  Exit. 

105      Cris.    Misery  of  times  when  Kings  doe  kill, 
Not  arm'd  by  Law  to  doe  it,  but  by  will. 
From  these  deepe  woes  that  my  poore  Countrey  beares 
Heaven  save  the  Queene  my  Mother,  Fates  are  just, 
And  till  the  thred  be  spun,  none  turne  to  dust. 

Enter  the  Shoomakers  Wife  sweating. 

no      Wife.    Fie,  fie,  fie;  Heaven  for  thy  pittie  how  am  I  us'd 
to-day!     Here  be  youths  indeed  to  runne  away,  and  leave 
me  in  this  order :  doe  I  keepe  one,  two,  three,  foure,  and  five 
journey-men,  besides  Prentises,  uprising  and  downe-lying, 
and  doe  they  all  bob  me  of  this  fashion?     How  now,  art 
115  thou  there  Crispine  ?  that's  well :  did  you  see  your  fellows  ? 
Cris.    Yes  my  good  Dame;  they  are  all  before  you. 
Wife.    Then  He  have  you  before  me  too,  but  not  so  farre 
as  they  are :  Fie,  fie,  see  how  I  sweat  with  following  them : 
Come  sir,  though  they  gave  me  the  slip,  you'le  not  serve  me 
120  so  I  hope.    Goe  before,  and  man  me. 
Cris.    O  my  good  Dame! 

Wife.  How  now  Crispine,  what's  the  matter  Boy  ?  Why 
are  so  many  Chancery  Bills  drawne  in  your  face?  Now, 
where  sits  the  winde  that  you  blow  so?  What  ayl'st  thou? 
125  Cris.  I  have  ever  found  you  a  kind  loving  Dame,  nay,  a 
good  Mother  both  to  my  selfe,  and  my  poore  Brother  Cris- 
pianus. 

Wife.    Blesse  him  good  Heaven,  upon  what  ground  so  e're 
he  tread :  he  was  an  honest  fellow,  and  a  good  servant,  and 
130  so  he  shall  finde,  if  e're  he  come  from  the  warres  agen. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  231 

Cris.  Oh  my  good  dame,  I  to  your  eares  must  now  un- 
locke  a  secret,  which,  if  ere  you  blab  abroad — 

Wif.  Never  by  my  Holy  dame ;  yet  I  have  much  adoe  to 
keepe  my  owne  secrets,  but  He  keepe  thine  He  warrant  thee. 

Crisp.    Nay  looke  dame,  my  life  and  death  lies  on  it.  135 

Wif.    Let  what  will  lie  on't,  it  shall  nere  be  talkt  of  by  me. 

Crisp.  He  thanke  yee  then;  this  it  is,  but  you  will  say 
nothing  ? 

Wif.    Dost  thinke  I  am  a  woman  or  a  beast  ? 

Cris.     Nor  be  angry  with  me?  140 

Wif.  Here's  a  doe  indeede,  thou  hast  not  got  a  wench 
with  child  hast? 

Cris.  You  have  found  my  griefe,  good  dame,  indeed  I 
have. 

Wif.    Out  upon  thee  Villaine.  145 

Cris.    Nay  good  Dame. 

Wif.  Hence  you  Whore-master  knave,  Gods  my  passion, 
got  a  wench  with  childe,  thou  naughty  packe  thou  hast  un- 
done thy  selfe  for  ever :  Precious  coales,  you  are  a  fine  youth 
indeed,  can  you  cut  out  no  shooes  but  of  Ducks  leather,  with  15° 
a  wanion  ?  has  your  Master  so  little  doings,  your  tooles  must 
be  working  abroad  in  a  f orrainers  shop  ? 

Cris.    Sweete  Dame,  you  swore  you  would  say  nothing. 

Wif.  Nothing,  hang  thee  villaine.  He  cry  it  at  the  Market 
Crosse:  I'  faith,  is  your  Aul  so  free  for  smocke-leather ?        IS5 

Crisp.    Good  Dame. 

Wif.  By  these  tenne  fingers  He  double  thy  years  f or't : 
Oh  that  I  knew  the  Queane,  I'de  slit  her  nose,  and  teare  her 
eyes  out  of  her  head  y'  faith. 

Enter  Shooe-maker. 

Shoo.    How  now,  what's  the  matter  that  it  thunders  so?  160 
Wif.    Oh,  you  are  as  good  a  Master  too  o'th  tother  side : 
you  looke  to  your  Prentises  well ;  one  of  your  men  has  beene 


232  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

at  greene-goose  faire ;  but  he  shall  pay  for  the  sauce  He  war- 
rant him. 
165      Shoo.     What  Faire?  what  Sauce,  goody  gander-goose? 

Wif.  Nay,  'tis  no  matter,  as  he  likes  this,  let  him  dance 
the  shaking  of  the  sheetes  another  time. 

Shoo.    What  sheetes  dame  Guiniver?  what  dance  I  pray 
yee? 
170      Wif.     Marry  uptailes  all:  doe  you  smell  me  now? 

Shoo.  I  smell  an  Asse  head  of  your  owne:  what's  all 
this  troe? 

Cris.    Pardon  me  Sir,  unlesse  you  stand  my  friend, 
Alas  I  am  but  dead. 
175       Wif.    Dead,    hang   yee   Rascall,    hang   yee;   you   were 
quicke  enough  when  you  laid  your  Whore  on  her  backe, 
to  take  measure  of  her  new  shooes:  Would  you  thinke  it 
Husband,  this  young  knave  has  got  a  wench  with  child. 

Shoo.    Hoyda,  and  is  this  the  shaking  of  the  sheetes  you 

180  talke  of,  good  wife  Snipper  Snapper :  s'foote  I  like  him 

the  better  fort :  he  is  of  your  husbands  trade,  you  old  whore, 

and  he  has  mettall  in  him :  dost  scould  for  that,  hold  your 

tongue  with  a  poxe. 

Wif.    I,  I,  one  Whore-master  will  take  part  with  another 
185  still. 

Shoo.  Peace  Walfiit,  leave  gaping.  A  wench  with  child  ? 
s'fut  in  my  my  capring  dayes  I  have  done  as  much  my  selfe 
Sis. 

Wif.     I,  beshrow  your  heart  for  your  labour. 
190      Shoo.    Peace  Sisley,  I  shall  sow  up  your  lips  else;  let  me 
talke  with  my  Prentise:  hast  got  a  maid  with  child  saist? 

Wife.     A  maid,  marry  hang  her  whore. 

Shoo.    Yet  agen,  keepe  your  Clacke,  He  slit  your  tongue 
else.     Speake  my  young  Cock-Sparrow,  what  merry  wag- 
195  taile  hast  thou  beene  billing  with? 

Cris.  O  Sir,  if  any  but  my  dame  and  you  should  know 
it,  I  were  lost  forever. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentlemcm  233 

Shoo.    Mum,  mum,  for  my  part  Boy;  and  you  Margery 
Magpye,  keepe  your  tongue   from  chattering,   or  by  the 
mary  maskins  He  tickle  your  gaskins :  Come,  say,  what  Did-  200 
apper  was't? 

Cris.    The  Emperours  Daughter  Sir. 

Shoo^    Who,  the  Princesse? 

Wife.     Out  upon  thee  Traytor. 

Shoo.     Sfoot  will  Bow-bell  never  leave  ringing?  will  the  205 
perpetuall  motion  of  your  old  chaps  never  leave  sounding? 
I  shall  beate  your  clapper  out  anon  for't:   Ah  sirrah,  goe 
too  boy,  no  Court-mustard  serve  your  turne  but  the  Em- 
perours Daughter?    This  is  fine  yfaith. 

Wife.    Hee'le    smoake  for't  I  warrant  him.  210 

Shoo.  Why  Wiperginie,  prating  still  I  say?  th'ast  drawne 
on  her  shooe  handsomely  by  the  Masse:  Prethee  tell  me, 
how  couldst  thou  being  but  a  poore  Shooemaker,  climbe  up 
to  a  Court-bed-sted  ? 

Wife.     Hee'le  climbe  to  the  Gallows  for't.  215 

Shoo.     Why  Knipperdolin,  is  the  Devill  in  thee? 

Cris.  I  have  climb'd  farther  Sir;  shee's  now  my  Wife, 
and  I  have  married  her. 

Wife.     Hoyda. 

Shoo.     Hush  madge  Howlet,  leave  hollowing.  220 

Cris.    That  very  day  my  Brother  was  prest  forth — 

Wife.    You  prest  her  at  night,  did  you? 

Shoo.     Grunting  still  you  Sow-guelder? 

Wife.    Thou  art  a  Coxcombe  and  a  Claperdudgion :  dost 
thou  see  now,  I  was  never  so  call'd  in  my  life  as  thou  225 
call'st  me.    Thou  maist  be  asham'd  on't :  this  'tis  to  let  thy 
Prentises  have  their  swing,  and  lye  out  at  nights  thus. 

Shoo.     Sweet  Pigsnie,  let  me  intreat  thy  patience:  alas 
poore  youth,  we  must  needs  helpe  him.     Why  I  commend 
him  that  he  shoots  at  the  fairest  marke :  what  an  excellent  ^^^ 
show  an  Emperours  Daughter  will  make  in  a  Shooemakers 
shop! 


234  -^  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Wife.     Shee'le  spin  a  faire  thred  I  warrant  you:  how 
will  he  maintaine  her  troe  yee? 
23s       Cris.    Shee  knew  my  fortunes  e're  she  married  me, 

And  now  your  selves  shall  know  them :  I  and  my  Brother 
That  thus  have  served  you  like  Prentises, 
Are  Princes  both,  and  Sonnes  to  Alured, 
Late  King  of  Brittaine. 
240      Sho.    How !  my  right  Worshipfull  Prentise ! 

Stands  hare. 
Wife.    Ha,  is  he  a  Kings  sonne  Husband? 
Shoo.    Make  courtsie  to  your  man  you  whore. 
Cris.    The  Emperour  Maximinus  slew  my  Father, 
And  put  the  Queene  my  Mother  into  Prison : 
24s  What  meane  you  gentle  Master,  pray  be  covered. 

Shoo.     No  by  my  faith  Sir,  you  are  a  better  man  than 
the  Master  of  my  Company. 

Cris.    And  seeing  all  my  hopes  lye  dead  save  in  her  selfe, 
I  lov'd,  reveal'd  my  selfe,  and  married  her; 
250  Yet  I  intreate  you  both — Nay  gentle  Master, 
I  am  your  Prentice  still,  pray  stand  not  bare. 

Shoo.    Well,  well,  for  this  once  I  will  boy;  now  you  old 
Gigumbob,  you  ne're  had  two  such  men  to  man  you. 

Wife.     Nay  truely  Husband,  I  ever  thought  they  were 
255  some  worshipfull  mans  sonnes,  they  were  such  mannerly 
boyes  still. 

Cris.    All  I  intreate  of  you  is  some  advice 
To  get  my  faire  Leodice  from  Court, 
And  then  some  secret  place  where  she  might  be 
260  In  safety  till  her  sweet  delivery. 
And  then  He  dare  misfortune. 

Wife.    Blessing  of  thy  heart,  I  like  thee  well  th'ast  such 

a  care  of  thy  Wife :  therefore  if  thou  couldst  but  steale  her 

from  the  Court,  and  bring  her  hither,  she  should  lye  in,  and 

265  be  brought  to  bed  at  my  house,^  and  no  body  know  it  I 

warrant  you. 

"Texts,  period  after  "house." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentlemmi  235 

Shoo.     I  marry  Tib  tattle-basket,®  how  should  we  doe 
that  wench? 

Cris.    That's  all  my  care  indeed,  to  steale  her  thence. 

Wife.  Come,  come,  leave  it  to  me  Boy,  I  see,  a  womans  270 
wit  must  helpe  at  a  pinch  still  Boy :  Marke  this  device,  and 
if  you  like  it,  doe  it,  and  thus  it  is :  Soone  at  night  thou 
shalt  hire  some  friend  to  fire  a  Tree  upon  the  Coast  at 
Dover,  as  neare  the  Beacons  as  can  be  possible,  by  which 
meanes  the  men  that  watch  the  other  Beacons,  seeing  that  275 
in  flames,  and  supposing  some  Enemy  landed,  will  presently 
fire  all  the  rest,  and  so  on  a  sudden  set  both  Court,  City, 
and  Countrey,  and  all  in  an  uproare,  in  which  time  if  you 
and  shee  cannot  bestirre  your  stumps,  and  run  both  away, 
would  you  were  whipt  yfaith.  280 

Shoo.    An  excellent  pate  to  trouble  the  whole  Common- 
alty; the  plot  is  good  yfaith  Boy. 

Cris.    I  like  it  well,  and  will  acquaint  the  Princesse  with 
it. 

Enter  Barnaby  and  Raph  crying. 

Bar.  Raph.    O  Master  and  Dame,  Dame  and  Master;  O  285 
lamentable  day!  now  or  never. 

Shoo.     How  now  Knaves,  tole  one  Bell  at  once,  and 
leave  jangling. 

Bar.   O  pittifull  Master,  intolerable  Dame,  I  am  the  fore- 
bell,  and  h'as  rung  all  in  many  a  time  and  often  with  you  290 
Dame :  but  now  I  must  ring  out  mine  owne  eyes  in  teares, 
in  dolour,  and  most  dolefull  knells :  My  fellow  Hugh  is 
taken,  and  condemn'd  like  a  Christian. 

Wife.     O  horrible! 

Shoo.     Peace  Bag-pipe :  my  man  Hugh  condemn'd,  how  295 
comes  that? 

Ba/r.    O  Master,  your  man  Hugh  is  not  the  man  you  took 
him  for ;  not  plaine  Hugh,  but  Sir  Hugh,  a  Knight  of  fame. 

•Texts,  "Tib-tattle  basket." 


236  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Shoo.    How  ?  a  Knight  of  the  Worshipful!  Company  of 
300  the  Cordwainers  ? 

Bar.  Nay,  by  St.  Davie,  hee's  more,  hee's  a  Welch 
Prince,  and  sonne  to  the  King  of  Powes  in  South  Wales, 
though  he  but  a  Shooemaker  here. 

Shoo.     Passion  of  me,  what  a  brood  of  Princes  have  I 
305  brought  up !    And  why  is  my  right  honourable  Servant  to 
be  put  to  death? 

Bar.  As  we  were  going  to  see  the  Christians,  he  spied 
his  old  Love  Queene  Winifred  amongst  them,  and  at  the 
very  sight  hee  look't  as  greene  as  a  leeke,  and  so  rusht  in 
310  amongst  them;  tooke  the  Lady  by  the  Lilly-white  hand, 
rail'd  on  the  Roman  gods,  defied  the  Emperour,  and  swore 
he  would  dye  if  she  did. 

Shoo.     Is  there  no  helpe  to  save  him? 

Raph.    None  in  the  World,  except  he  leave  to  be  a  Chris- 
315  tian. 

Bar.  'Tis  true  Sir,  all  the  Sergeants  and  Officers  that 
came  to  arest  him,  pittying  his  case,  perswaded  him  to  be 
no  good  Christian,  as  they  were :  then  there  was  a  Broker 
said  hee  would  lay  his  soule  to  pawne,  he  could  not  prosper 
320  if  he  were  a  Christian;  nay,  the  laylor  cries  out  on  him,  and 
sayes,  if  he  continue  a  Christian,  hee'le  use  him  like  a  Dog. 

Shoo.    Alacke  the  day; 
I'me  sorry  for  my  honourable  boote  hailer : 
Goe  and  comfort  him;  He  see  him  anon  tell  him. 
325      Ba/r.    Nay,  stay  sweete  Master,  'twas  never  scene  that  a 
Shooe-maker  and  his  men  were  base  Bassilomions,  but  true 
bonus  socius,  up  se  freeze,  though  we  cannot  get  him  from 
prison.  He  sell  my  coate  from  my  backe,  ere  a  Shoomaker 
shall  want:  Let  us  shew  our  selves  Cavaleeres  or  Coblers: 
330  come  every  man  his  twelvepence  a  peece  to  drinke  with  him 
in  prison. 

Shoo.  A  good  motion:  boone  boyes,  fine  knaves;  I  like 
you  well  when  you  hang  together :  Hold  my  brave  Journey- 
men, there's  a  double  share  for  me. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  237 

Crisp.    And  mine  with  all  my  heart  y'faith.  335 

Wif.    And  cause  he's  a  Knight,  thou  shalt  have  my  shil- 
ling too. 

Bcir.    I  thanke  you  Dame : 
Nay,  weele  never  leave  a  brother  of  our  company, 
As  long  as  flesh  and  bones  will  hang  together.  340 

Shoo.    Away  boyes,  goe  you  before; 
Joane  jumblebreech  your  Dame  and  I  will  follow, 
Cherish  him  up,  tell  him  he  shall  not  want; 
He  lives  not  in  the  world  could  ever  say, 
A  Shooe-maker  from  his  friend  did  flinch  away.     Exeunt.  345 


[Act  IV.     Scene  2.] 

\_An  open  Square  in  Canterbury. '\ 

Flourish:  Enter  Maximinus,   Bassianus,  Lutius,   Officers; 

Albon  and  Amphiabel  in  their  shirts,  as  from 

Torments. 

Max.    Resolve  me  yet,  you  stubborne  Christians, 
Cannot  the  severall  tortures  which  we  doe  inflict. 
Yet  melt  the  Iron  of  your  hardned  hearts. 
To  make  you  bow  unto  our  Roman  gods? 
Speake,  will  you  obey  our  best?  5 

Amph.     None  but  the  bests  of  heaven. 

Alh.    A  thousand  deaths  have  not  the  bitter  stings 
As  are  the  paines  we  have  felt  in  torturing; 
Yet  Tyrant  wee'le  endure  tenne  thousand  more, 
And  laugh  in  deaths  face,  e're  we  our  faiths  give  o're.  10 

Max.    Renowned  Albon,  on  thy  head  He  set 
A  Crowne  of  gold. 

Alb.    To  make  me  heaven  forget : 
Never. 

Amph.    Never. 


238  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Max.    Let  me  yet  winne  thee  foolish  man: 
15  Remember  what  honours  we,  and  Dioclesian 
Heapt  upon  thee :  giving  thee  the  stile 
Brittaines  Stewardship,  the  Prince  of  Knights, 
Lord  of  Varlome. 

Alh.     And  in  thy  Rackes,  thy  Irons,  Gibbets,  and  thy 
Wheele, 
20  Doe  I  more  honour,  and  more  comfort  feele. 
Than  all  those  painted  smoakes  by  thee  bestowed 
Of  me :  my  Countrey  may  thus  much  boast :  Albon 
Stood  firme  and  fixt,  in  spight  of  tyrants  wrath, 
Brittaines  first  Martyr  for  the  Christian  faith. 
25      Max.    But  not  the  last :  for  to  thy  scorne  He  adde 
Millions  of  Christian  slaves,'^  to  death  and  tortures. 
Lut.    Dispatch  these  first. 

Max.     I  will  dragge  them  hence  in  Chaines  to  Holnurst 
Hill, 
Three  miles  from  Verolome,  where  Albons  Lord, 
30  There  after  blowes,  and  spightfull  buffettings. 

For  honour  of  his  knight-hood,  once  held  the  chiefe. 
He  shall  have  a  Knight  to  be  his  Heads-man. 

Alb.     That  stroake  shall  well  be  given, 
That  makes  roome  for  a  soule  to  flye  to  heaven. 
35      Max.     This  fiend  Amphiabel,  from  whose  damn'd  Teate 
He  suckt  this  poyson,  shall  there  be  bound 
By  a  fixed  stake,  to  which  nail'd  fast. 
The  Navell  of  his  belly  being  opened, 
Then  with  your  sword  prick  him,  and  force  him  rurme 
40  About  like  a  wheele,  till  he  has  spunne  his  Guts  out : 
And  that  dispatcht,  saw  off  his  traiterous  head. 
Amph.     Caesar  in  greater  triumph  nere  was  led. 
Max.    Away  with  them ;  Albon's  the  first  shall  dye : 
Alh.     Thou  honour'st  me  amidst  thy  tyranny: 
45  Come  on  dear  friend, 

'Texts,  "flames." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  239 

Amph.    Eternity  protect  us  to  our  end : 
Fight  nobly  then. 

Alb  on.    To  my  latest  breath : 
I  goe  to  a  wedding  ( friend )  and  not  to  death. 

Max.    Goe  dragge  'em  hence ;  this  day 
Weele  quaffe  the  blood  of  Christians :  call  forth  more :  50 

So  perish  all  will  not  our  gods  adore. 

Enter  Hugh,  Winifred,  and  Shooe-makers. 

Bar.  Nay  fellow  Hugh,  or  noble  Sir  Hugh,  remember 
'tis  not  every  mans  case  to  dye  a  Christian ;  prethee  leave  it 
then,  and  save  thy  life;  the  Roman  gods  are  as  good  gods 
as  e're  trode  on  a  shooe  of  leather:  and  therefore  sweete  55 
Hugh  wee  may  get  their  custome,  and  bring  'em  to  our 
shoppe,  and  so  we  shall  be  Shooe-makers  to  the  gods. 

Hugh.     You  trouble  me,  I  pray  leave. 

Bar.    Leave  thee,  not  as  long  as  thou  liv'st  I'faith. 

Max.    What  are  all  these?  60 

5cw.  Men  that  respect  a  Christian  no  more  than  you 
doe.  Sir  you  neede  not  feare,  there's  not  a  good  Christian 
among  us. 

Max.     Honest  fellowes :  backe,  and  give  the  Prisoners 
roome. 

Win.    Come  my  constant  friend :  noble  Sir  Hugh  g^ 

At  last  farewell  joyne  hands  we  never 
Shall  touch  one  another  more,  when  these  we  sever; 
Thou  long  hast  lov'd  me;  truer  ne're  was  found, 
That  both  in  life  and  death  keepes  faith  so  sound : 
All  that  my  love  can  give  thee  for  thy  paines  70 

He  marry  thee,  but  death  must  bid  the  banes : 
Never  to  wedding  was  such  honour  given. 
Our  weding  dinner  must  be  kept  in  heaven. 

Hugh.     At  which  Angels  shall  waite:    Saints  be  our 
guests, 
Our  soules  the  wedding  couple,  and  the  feast  75 


240  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Joy  and  eternity;  our  bridall  roome 
The  Hall  of  heaven,  where  hand  in  hand  weele  come, 
Martyrs  to  dance  a  measure,  which  beginnes 
Unto  the  musick  of  the  Cherubins. 
80      Max.    Meane  time,  even  here  you  both  shall  dance  with 
death ; 
Yet  if  our  Gods  you'le  serve,  prolong  your  breath. 

Hugh.    'Tis  life  we  seeke  to  loose ;  Tyrant  strike  home, 
They  are  but  walls  of  clay  which  thou  beatst  downe. 
Max.    Call  a  Hangman,  flea  that  villaine  straight, 
85  And  teare  that  womans  flesh  with  burning  Pincers. 
Win.    We  both  are  ready  Sir, 
Yet  heare  me  Maximinus;  by  all  the  Rites 
Of  honour  I  conjure  thee,  in  Law  of  woman-hood, 
Let  not  my  body  be  a  Villaines  prey ; 
go  But  since  I  am  a  Queene  and  spotlesse  Virgin, 
Let  me  chuse  my  death. 

Max.    Because  thou  once  wert  daughter  to  a  King 
Injoy  thy  wish,  so  death  may  forth  with  strike, 
Meete  him  in  any  shape  thou  best  shall  like. 
gi^       Win.     Be  sure  it  shall : 

Be  thou  the  chiefe  mourner  at  my  funerall. 
My  earthly  love  farewell;  thy  cheeke  He  kisse, 
Wee'le  meete  anon  within  the  land  of  blisse : 
Follow  my  f ootesteps  thou  shalt  soone  be  there : 
100  Courage  good  heart,  to  dye  I  cannot  feare. 
He  be  the  first,  and  teach  thee  how  to  dye. 
Leading  the  way  to  sweete  felicity. 
Come  Tyrants  lanch  my  arme,  to  death  He  bleed, 
Sweete  blood  was  shed  for  me,  and  mine  He  sheede. 
105      Max.    Dispatch  and  lanch  her  arme,  but  save  the  blood 
The  which  this  day  to  holy  lupiter 
He  sacrifice. 

Win.    My  dearest  friend  farewell, 
y.^  In  one  house  shortly  wee'le  for  ever  dwell. 

\^A  vein  is  opened  in  her  arm.'] 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  241 

Hugh.    The  storme  of  death  now  comes,  beare  up  brave 
saile. 

Win.    I  feele  no  storme,  but  even  the  merriest  gaile  no 

That  ever  Hfe  was  driven  with :  Oh  how  sweet 
A  dreame  me  thinkes  I  now  am  in ;  Angels  doe  runne 
To  meete  and  welcome  me  unto  the  Land  of  blisse, 
Singing  I  have  spunne  a  golden  thred. 

Hugh.    That  thread  of  gold  weave  still.  115 

Win.    I  doe ;  farewell :  make  haste  to  meete —  Dies. 

Hugh.    In  faith  I  will, 
In  a  whole  Campe  of  Martyrs ;  blest  Fate 
Shee's  gone  for  ever  to  an  Angels  state. 

Max.     Dispatch  him;  and  dragge  her  body  hence. 

Hugh.    'Tis  sister  to  the  Saints ;  oh  give  it  reverence.       120 
Why  doe  I  linger  here,  my  love  being  gone? 

Bar.    A  right  Shooe-maker,  he  loves  a  woman. 

Hugh.     Mercifull  Tyrant  set  me  on  deaths  wings. 
That  I  may  beare  a  part  where  my  love  sings 
Etemall  Hymnes  of  joy;  blest  love  I  come,  125 

As  soone  as  I  can  set  forth  out  of  this  house 
Of  earth  and  clay :  when  shall  this  stroake  be  given, 
That  I  may  mount  and  meete  my  love  in  heaven? 

Max.    Flea  him  alive :  yet  stay,  because  you  are  so  love- 
sicke, 
Wee'le  give  you  a  drinke  to  cure  it:  Powre  into  a  Cup  130 

His  sweete-hearts  blood,  and  give  it  us. 

Hugh.    'Tis  precious  Wine,  holy,  and  good. 

Max.    And  you  shall  quaffe  your  fill : 
So,  put  in  Poyson,  spice  it  well; 
There  drinke  thy  last,  and  sinke  with  her  to  hell.  135 

Hugh.    Oh  let  me  kisse  this  heavenly  cup  of  all  my  hap- 
'  pinesse: 
Deare  Love  to  thy  blest  soules  etemall  goodnesse, 
I  drinke  this  health,  fild  to  th'  brimme : 
Two  hearts  did  never  so  in  one  streame  swimme. 


\ 


242  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

140 As  thine  and  mine  shall  now;  and  though  thy  blood 
Be  poysond,  this  our  loves  keepes  firme  and  good. 
My  Countrey  men  and  fellow  Shoo-makers, 
As  of  my  best  of  friends  I  take  my  leave : 
We  many  times  together  have  drunke  healths, 

145  But  none  like  this:  yet  He  beginne  to  you  all; 
But  here  you  shall  not  pledge  me. 

Bar.    Yes,  and  'twere  Aquavitae  we  would  pledge  thee. 
Hugh.    The  love  which  I  so  found  in  you, 
Even  in  my  latest  houre,  He  not  forget, 

15.0  But  to  you  all  beginne  my  lasting  love, 
Never  did  faire  society  of  men 
More  please  me :  you  are  a  trade 
Of  fellowships  best  mixture,  nobly  made. 
Bar.     We  are  Shooe-makers,  and  so. 

155      Hugh.     My  being  amongst  you,  thus  shall  you  preferre, 
To  say  a  Prince  was  once  a  Shooe-maker. 
For  which  you  now  shall  raise  your  skill  aloft, 
And  be  cal'd  gentlemen  of  the  Gentle  craft. 
Bar.    Oh  noble  Sir  Hugh. 

160     Hugh.    Could  I  give  Indian  Mines,  they  all  were  yours; 
But  I  have  nought  to  give,  nor  ought  to  take. 
But  this  my  farewell ;  therefore  for  my  sake. 
When  Death  has  seiz'd  my  flesh,  take  you  my  bones, 
Which  I  bequeath  amongst  you  to  be  buried. 

165  Bar.  Take  no  care  for  thy  winding  sheete,  sweete  Hugh, 
for  never  was  gentleman  of  the  Gentle  craft  so  buryed  as 
thou  shouldst  bee,  if  thou  hadst  drunke  thy  last. 

Hugh.    Now  trouble  me  no  more :  upon  this  stage 
Of  death  I  set  my  foote :  to  all  farewell, 

1 70  Angels  shall  clap  their  wings  to  ring  my  knell, 
And  bid  me  welcome  to  the  land  of  rest. 
Where  my  immortall  love  lives  ever  blest: 
A  health  deare  soule  He  drinke  to  thee :  [Drinks.  ]  so,  so, 
How  soone  he  fades,  that  now  so  fresh  did  grow ! 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  243 

Flye  up  my  soule  to  heaven,  my  sins  sinke  to  the  earth;       175 
Thus  doe  I  seale  my  holy  Christian  faith.     [Dies.] 

Ralph.     O  noble  Sir  Hugh,  oh  lamentable  Hearing. 

Max.     Conveigh  that  other  body  hence,  and  give  it 
Buriall  as  befits  her  state :  for  this,  bestow  it 
On  these  shooemakers,  as  he  bequeath'd  it.  180 

Bar.     No  Shooemakers  now  Sir,  but  the  gentle  Craft 
Shall  see  it  buried  in  state  and  pompe. 

Max.    Vse  your  own  pleasures;  where's  Bassianus? 
How  chanc'd  our  Daughter,  bright  Leodice, 
Came  not  to  see  these  slaughtred  Christians?  185 

Bos.     Shee  keeps  her  Chamber  Sir. 

Max.     Is  she  not  well?  let  her  be  kept  with  care. 
And  to  the  gods  of  Rome  these  Trophies  reare. 

Flourish,  exit  Maxim. 

Bar.    Well  my  Masters,  I  could  finde  in  my  heart  to  raile 
upon  this  Emperour  Mr.   Minus,  but  that  I  doubt  hee'le  190 
make  us  all  die  like  Christians,  and  that  he  shall  never  doe 
as  long  as  we  live  I  warrant  him. 

Raph.    Wee'le  watch  him  for  that  yfaith. 

Ba/r.  So  let  him  passe  then,  and  let  us  lay  our  sinodicall 
heads  together,  to  know  what  shall  become  of  Sir  Hugh.      195 

Raph.     Let's  all  joyne  together,  and  bury  him. 

Boa-.    How  hke  a  Christian  thou  talk'st :  what  before  hee 
be  cold  ?  then  we  should  use  him  as  many  rich  heires  desire 
to  use  their  fathers :    No,  because  he  was  a  Prince,  and  did 
such  honour  to  our  Trade,  we'le  bury  him  like  a  Prince  and  200 
a  Shooemaker. 

All.     Agreed,  agreed. 

Bar.  You  know  he  gave  us  the  name  of  the  Gentle  Craft, 
and  if  we  should  give  him  an  ill  word  now,  'twere  a  shame 
yfaith.  205 

Raph.  That's  true;  how  shall  ^ye  doe  then  to  honour 
him? 

Bar.    Marry  thus  fellow-gentlemen,  of  my  fellow  Hughs 


244  ^  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleinan 

making,  to  requite  his  kindnesse,  because  he  dyed  a  Chris- 

2IO  tian,  he  shall  no  more  be  call'd  Sir  Hugh,  but  St.  Hugh, 

and  the  Saint  for  ever  of  all  the  Shooemakers  in  England. 

All.    O  brave,  brave  Barnaby:  St.  George  for  England, 
and  St.  Hugh  for  the  Shooemakers. 

Bar.     An  you  be  Gentlemen,  heare  me:  you  know  be- 
215  sides,  h'as  given  his  bones  amongst  us.    Now  you  must  not 
thinke  as  if  a  Butcher  had  given  us  a  dozen  maribones  to 
be  pick't. 

All.    Well,  well,  how  then? 

Bar.    Marry  thus ;  in  memory  of  his  gift,  all  our  work- 
220  ing  tooles,  from  this  time  for  ever,  shall  be  call'd  St.  Hughs 
bones. 

All.     Brave,  brave,  that  shall  stand  for  ever  y  faith. 

Raph.    I,  but  which  of  our  tooles  shall  we  call  so  ? 

Bar.  Marry  even  all  fellow  Raph,  all  the  tooles  we 
225  worke  with :  as  for  example,  the  Drawer,  Dresser,  Wedges, 
Heele-block,  hand  and  thumb-lethers,  Shooe-thrids,  Pincers, 
pricking-aule,  and  a  rubbing-stone,  Aule,  Steele,  and  Tacks, 
shooe-haires,  and  Stirrups,  whetstone,  and  stopping-sticke, 
Apron,  and  Paring-knife,  all  these  are  Sir  Hughs  bones. 
230  Now  sir,  whatsoever  he  be,  that  is  a  Gentleman  of  the  Gen- 
tle Craft,  and  has  not  all  these  at  his  fingers  ends,  to  reckon 
them  up  in  Rime,  shall  presently  up  with  him,  and  strapado 
his  bum. 

All.  An  everlasting  Law  renowned  Barnaby. 
235  Bar.  Nay,  heare  me  sing  like  a  Swan,  or  a  Sowter: 
Furthermore,  if  any  lourney-man  shall  travell  without 
these  tooles,  now  call'd  St.  Hughs  bones,  at  his  back,  and 
cannot  slash,  cut,  and  crack  coxcombes,  with  brave  Sword 
and  Buckler,  long  sword,  and  quarter-staffe,  sound  a  Trum- 
240  pet,  or  play  o'th  Flute,  'or  beare  his  part  in  a  three  mans 
Song,  he  shall  forfeit  a  Gallon  of  wine,  and  be  counted  a 
Colt  as  long  as  his  shooes  are  made  of  running  lether: 
Speake,  is't  agreed  on? 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  245 

All.    Agreed,  agreed,  agreed. 

Bar.    Wee'le  take  up  the  body  then.  2.4' 

Ra>ph.    He  have  a  leg  of  him. 

1.  And  I  another. 

2.  And  I  another. 

3.  And  He  helpe  thee  Raph. 

Bar.     With  reverence  and  with  silence  then:  250 

For  as  we  have  made  these  Lawes  in  remembrance  of  him, 
So  it  shall  not  be  amisse  to  make  it  the  sweeter. 
To  reckon  up  our  tooles,  and  put  them  in  meeter, 
And  instead  of  a  Deirge,  I  thinke  it  fit  time 
And  reason  to  reckon  Sir  Hughs  bones  in  Rime:  255 

The  Drawer  first,  and  then  the  Dresser, 
Wedges  and  Heele-blocks,  greater  and  lesser; 
Yet  tis  not  worth  two  Ganders  feathers, 
Vnlesse  you  have  the  hand  and  thumb-lethers : 
Then  comes  your  short-heeles.  Needle,  and  Thimble,  260 

With  Pincers  and  pricking  Aule,  so  neate  and  nimble : 
Rubbing-stone  next,  with  Aule,  Steele,  and  Tacks, 
Which  often  will  hold  when  the  shooe-leather  cracks : 
Then  Stirrup,  stopping-stick,  with  good  Sow-haires, 
Whet-stone,  and  cutting-knife  which  sharply  pares :  265 

And  lastly,  to  clap  Saint  Hughs  bones  in 
An  Apron  that's  made  of  a  jolly  sheepes  skin. 
And  thus  to  all  Shooemakers  we  bid  adieu. 
With  tryumph  to  bury  the  famous  St.  Hugh.  Exeunt. 


246  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

AcTvs  QviNTVS.     [Scene  i.J 
[An  open  Square.] 

A  cry  within,  arme,  arme,  arme;  then  enter  a  sort  of  Country 
people  at  severall  doores. 

All.    Arme,  arme,  arme;  what  shall  we  doe  neighbours? 

1.  The  Beacons  are  on  fire,  and  my  heart  freezes  in  my 
belly. 

2.  They  are  fir'd  round  about  us,  and  all  the  Country  in 
5  an  uproare;  my  very  nose  drops  with  feare. 

3.  If  our  Enemies  finde  us  in  these  cold  sweats,  we  are 
all  sure  to  goe  to  th  pot  for't. 

4.  Therefore  let's  goe  to  th'   pot  first;   for  when  the 
Drinke's  in;  the  Wit's  out:  and  when  the  wit  is  out,  we 

10  shall  fight  like  mad  men. 

1.  Content,  and  as  we  goe,  let's  raise  the  Countrey. 
All.     Arme,  arme,  arme. 

Enter  Bassianus  and  Lutius.^ 

Bos.     What  Alarum's  this?     Why  cry  yee  so  like  mad 
men? 
15       I.  Because  we  have  no  weapons  in  our  hands  Sir. 
Lut.    Why  are  the  Beacons  fir'd? 

2.  We  are  all  affraid  to  thinke  on't ;  they  say  the  Enemy 
is  landed  Sir. 

Bos.     Stand  you  here  like  sheepe,  when  danger  beats  so 
20  rudely  at  your  doores? 

4.  There  let  'em  beate,  he  shall  not  be  let  in  for  me.    The 
Enemies  are  landed  men,   and  therefore  wee'le  goe  by 
water :  Come  neighbours. 
Within.    Arme,  arme,  arme. 

^Texts,  "Latius." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentletnmi  247 

Lut.    The  cry  is  still  rais'd,  let's  put  the  Court  in  Armas,  25 
And  certifie  the  Emperour. 

Ba\s.    With  all  the  speed  that  may  be, 
Arme,  arme,  arme.  Exeunt  Bassian.  &  hut. 

2.  Let  us  be  wise  neighbours,  and  whilst  they  cry  Armes, 
Let  us  cry  leggs,  and  trust  unto  our  heeles.  30 

Exeunt  Neighbours,  the  cry  continued. 

Enter  Crispine  and  Leodice. 

Oris.     The  stratagem  takes  rarely,  come  faire  Leodice, 
This  tumult  in  the  Court  gives  meanes  to  flie. 

Lead.    Thus  folded  in  thine  Armes  I  wish  to  dye. 

Cris.    Talke  not  of  Death,  live,  and  be  blest  for  ever. 
No  frowne  of  Fate  two  faithful!  hearts  can  sever.    Exeunt.  35 

Within.    Arme,  arme,  arme. 

Enter  Emperour  and  Lords  with  weapons  drawne. 

Max.    My  Horse  and  Armour  villaines : 
High  lupiter  protect  us;  what  neglect  is  this. 
The  Beacons  fir'd,  and  a  whole  Land  asleepe, 
When  Foes  come  arm'd  in  Thunder?  40 

Guard  the  Court,  see  to  our  Daughters  safety, 
I  feare  these  sudden  tumults  have  disturb'd  her. 

Enter  Shoomakers  with  staves. 

All.    Arme,  arme,  arme. 

Bar.    An  you  be  men,  shew  your  selves  so. 

Max.    Why  d'ee  cry  thus?  say,  whither  run  yee?  45 

Bar.    Out  of  our  wits  I  thinke  Sir ;  the  Beacons  all  along 
the  Sea-coast  burne  most  horribly. 

Max.     And  what's  the  cause  on't? 

Bar.    Because  they  are  a  fire  Sir :  Ten  thousand  Kentish 
men  which  woefuU  taile's  to  tell,  are  knockt  downe  like  50 
sheepe  Sir:  the  Enemy  is  landed  at  Sandwitch,  set  a  shore 


248  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

at  Dover,  and  arrived  at  Rumny  Marsh :  harke,  I  heare  the 
Drummes  already. 

Max.    I  am  amaz'd,  what  Drumme  is  this? 

{A  low  march. 
55  Stand  on  your  guard. 

Bar.  I  would  your  Guard  were  here  for  us  to  stand  upon, 
That  we  might  reach  the  further :  Come,  feare  nothing  Sir ; 
Let  your  Lords  and  you  stand  by,  and  see 
How  we  Shoemakers  will  thrash  'em. 

Enter  Crispianus  with  Drurmne  and  Souldiers  richly  attir'd. 

60     Cris.    Health  to  the  Emperour  from  the  Roman  State. 
Bas.     These  are  our  Brittaine  friends,  new  come  from 
France. 
Max.    Whom  at  your  landing  saw  you  up  in  Armes, 
That  fright  the  Countrey  thus? 

Cris.    None  my  good  Lord,  not  any; 
From  France  and  Dioclesian  thus  I  bring 
65  These  Brittaine  Souldiers  back  tryumphant  home : 
The  black  storme  there  is  laid,  and  sure  these  feares 
That  bring  these  home-bred  terrours,  all  are  false : 
And  as  I  guesse,  the  firing  of  the  Beacons, 
Was  at  the  sight  of  Dioclesians  Fleete, 
70  That  with  himselfe  now  rides  in  Dover-rode, 
And  is  by  this  on  shore :  and  how  in  France 
The  die  of  War  hath  run,  His  Majesty 
In  these  Imperiall  Letters  certifies. 
Max.    Thankes  for  thy  newes,  wee'le  read  them  straight. 
75     Bar.     By  St.  Hughs  bones  we  were  all  affraid  of  our 
owne  shadows,  we  shall  have  no  cuffing  now  I  see. 

Enter  Lutius. 

Max.    What  newes  brings  Lutius? 
Lut.    Comfort  my  Lord,  the  errour's  found ; 
The  sudden  fire  that  kindled  all  this  feare. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  249 

Is  now  quencht  out;  the  cloud  that  threatned  stormes,  80 

Is  turn'd  to  drops  of  heate :  some  knavish  fellow 

Hard  by  the  Sea-coast  set  a  Tree  on  fire, 

Which  scene,  men  thought  that  Dover  Beacon  flam'd. 

And  so  fir'd  all  the  rest,  and  rais'd  the  Alarum. 

Max.    I  am  glad  it  is  no  worse;  run  Bassianus,  85 

And  sing  this  comfort  to  our  Daughters  eares, 

Bas.    I  shall  my  Lord. 

Max.    These  Letters  of  your  noble  Victories 
Are  as  your  selfe,  most  welcome,  on  whose  head 
Our  brother  Dioclesian  layes  the  glory  90 

Of  the  conquest  o're  the  Vandals  and  the  Goths : 
He  writes,  he  gave  unto  thy  manly  Thigh 
The  sword  of  Kight-hood,  wishing  us  to  adde 
More  honours  on  thee,  which  at  his  arivall, 
His,  and  our  hand  shall  doe  with  royall  bounty.  ne 

Cris.     I  am  your  lowly  Vassall,  royall  Soveraigne, 

Bar.    Dost  heare  fellow  Ralph,  me  thinkes  I  should  know 
this  Captaine ;  he  lookes  as  like  Crispianus  as  can  be  ? 

Enter  Bassianus. 

Max.     Now  Bassianus,  speake,  how  fares  our  daughter? 

Bas.    Alas  my  Lord,  the  Court  is  all  in  mourning,  100 

The  Princesse  with  this  suddaine  feare 
Is  fled  the  Court,  not  to  be  found  by  any. 

Max.    Not  to  be  found,  why  where's  her  Nurse  ? 

Enter  Nurse. 

Bas.    See  here  she  comes. 

Max.     Speake,  doating  Beldam;  where's  my  daughter.     105 

Nur.     Fie,  fie,  fie,  I  have  not  so  much  wit  left 

As  to  tell  yea  where  I  am  my  selfe,  O  my  side. 

Pray  let  me  breath  a  little; 

When  this  hurly  burly  beganne  i'  th'  Court, 


250  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

no  Shee  ranne,  and  I  ranne;  she  haild,  and  I  puld; 
She  cry'd,  and  I  roar'd ;  but  her  f eare  being 
Stronger  than  my  old  bones,  away  whipt  shee 
Out  at  the  Court-gates,  and  I  fell  in  a  sound, 
Starke  dead  y' faith;  had  not  a  Gentleman  Usher 
115  Come  by  and  clapt  me  soundly,  I'de  beene 

Past  telling  Tales  by  this  time.    Oh  my  Backe. 

Max.     Oh  dismall  chance!     Search  every  roome; 
This  dismall  clamour  may  so  feare  her  blood. 
That  death  may  seize  her,^  haste :  if  in  the  Court 
120  You  misse  her;  see't  proclaim'd,  that  whosoever 
Brings  me  her  alive,  goes  laden  with  rewards; 
If  nobly  borne,  we  give  her  him  to  wife : 
Make  haste,  slippe  not  an  houre, 

While  I  set  on  to  meete  the  Emperour.  Exit. 

125      Bar.    I  say  'tis  he;  He  speake  to  him  what  e're  come  on't. 
Crispianus  ? 

Crisp.     My  honest  fellow  Barnaby! 
Bar.    O  Rumpes  and  Kidnyes,  did  not  I  tell  you  so? 
Ralph.     Honest  Crispianus,  welcome  from  France. 
130      Crisp.    I  thanke  you :  how  does  my  Master  ? 

Bar.     In  health,  and  brave  as  Holly :  So  art  thou  me 

thinks. 
Crisp.    The  fortune  of  the  warres :  is  my  Dame  well  too. 
B(w.     The  old  wench  still :  she  keeps  the  marke  in  her 
135  mouth. 

Crisp.    And  how  does  my  brother  Crispine  ? 
Bar.    Oh  he  is  the  fore-man  of  the  shop  since  you  went ; 
nay,  we  have  newes  to  tell  thee  anon  when  we  are  drinking ; 
we  have  given  o're  the  Shooe-makers  cloakes  now,  and  are 
140  become  Gentlemen  of  the  Gentle  Craft,  and  all  our  working 
tooles  are  cald  Saint  Hugh's  bones. 
Crisp.     That's  excellent. 

°Texts,  no  punctuation  after  "her." 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  251 

Enter  Shooe-maker. 

Shooe.  How  now  my  tall  trencher  men,  what  make  you 
amongst  Courtiers?  What  my  Mars,  Bacchus,  Apollo, 
virorum,  the  Basselus  manus,  my  noble  Crispianus :  and  145 
how  does  the  brave  Monsiers  in  France,  my  brave  Sheva- 
leere?  As  I  am  a  Gentleman  of  the  Gentle  Craft,  thou  art 
welcome. 

Crisp.     I  thanke  your  love  and  kindnesse  Sir. 

Shooe.    Away  my  strong  Beere  drinkers;  there's  a  Noble  150 
in  English,  goe  drinke  a  health  to  Saint  Hugh's  Bones;  I 
must  have  some  speech  in  private,  and  enter  parly  with  my 
Man  of  Warre. 

Bar.    As  long  as  this  Drumme  will  strike,  wee'le  fight  it 
out  with  pike  and  pot:  wee'le  drinke  a  health  to  you  both  155 
Master.  Exit. 

Slwo.  Away  my  fine  leather  sellers,  shrinke  awhile  i'th 
wetting;  whilst  thus  I  salute  my  right  worshipfull  Cord- 
wainer:  for  I  heare  say  the  Knightly  Dub  a  Dub  has  been 
laid  on  thy  shoulders.  160 

Crisp.     It  pleas'd  the  Emperour  so  to  honour  me. 

Shoo.  He  honours  me  and  all  my  company  by  it:  By 
Saint  Hughs  Bones  thou  shalt  take  the  wall  of  thy  Master 
now  yfaith  boy. 

Crisp.     The  Wall,  not  so  Sir.  165 

Sho.  And  the  Kennell  too  by  the  Spreech-awles :  nay 
Sir,  I  know  more  than  you  thinke  I  doe :  Your  Brother  has 
song  the  three  mans  song,  and  told  all  yfaith :  you  were 
once  my  Princely  Prentise. 

Crisp.   Sir.    If  my  brother  has  disclos'd  to  you  our  births,  170 
I  doe  conjure  you,  as  my  dearest  friend. 
For  to  conceale  it. 

Shoo.  Mum,  mum  boyes,  as  close  as  my  Currier  and  I 
in  a  Taverne  on  a  munday  morning:  tut,  my  Princely 
Prentise,  thy  brother  knowes  that  I  am  leather  that  will  I7S 


252  A  Shoo-niaker  a  Gentleman 

hold  all  waters  when  he  trusts  me  with  a  secret :  Harke  in 
thine  eare  boy,  has  got  a  Wench  with  child  by  th'  masse. 
Crisp.    How,  a  wench  with  child? 

Shoo.  Yes,  and  a  great  one  too :  no  lesse  than  the  Em- 
180  perours  daughter,  and  shee's  as  bigge  as  shee  can  tumble: 
Has  entred  the  best  Chamber  ith'  Court,  has  tickled  her 
shooe  sole  for  a  girle  or  a  boy  by  this  time ;  and  harke  once 
more,  she  lyes  in  at  my  house,  too,  but  mum;  no  more 
words  boy. 
185      Crisp.    Pray  heaven  you  catch  no  hurt  by  it, 

For  the  Emperour  sends  forth  wondrous  search  to  find  her. 
Shoo.  No  matter,  she  shall  be  welcome  home  when  e're 
she  comes,  I  hope  shee's  deliver'd  too  by  this  time,  for  I 
heard  such  a  Catterwalling,  and  my  wife  stirres  up  and 
190  downe  that  she  stinkes :  Nay  more,  the  Beacons  were  fired 
on  purpose  to  steale  her  from  Court,  and  onely  by  the 
knavery  and  policy  of  Gillian  Ginger-taile  my  wife. 

Crisp.    The  accident  is  strange ;  see,  here  comes  my  Dame 
and  Brother. 

Enter  Crispiniis,  and  Shooe-makers  wife  with  a  child. 

Shooe.     Gods  me  shee's  delivered:  Ha  boy,  art  come? 
195  come  hither  Crispine,  know  yee  this  Shevaleere? 
Crisp.    My  dearest  Brother. 

Crispian.    I  am  glad  to  see  you:  I  heare  strange  newes 
brother. 

Cri&p.    If  from  my  Master  Sir  the  newes  did  come, 
Tis  true,  and  He  with  life  maintaine. 
200      Shoo.    Looke  here  old  Sis,  your  other  Prentise  is  come. 
Crispian.    My  gentle  Dame. 

Wife.     Sweete    Crispianus,    welcome    home    from    the 
warres ;  nay  sir,  your  brother  has  beene  in  Armes  too :  Doe 
you  see  what  exployts  has  done? 
205      Shoo.    Is't  a  boy  wife? 

Wife.    A  boy  I'me  sure,  has  a  Purse  and  two  pence  in't : 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  253 

nay  come  Sir,  you  shall  kisse  your  kinseman :  here's  his 
Fathers  owne  nose  yfaith. 

Crispicm.    A  Princely  babe, 
The  eye  of  Heaven  looke  on  thee,  and  maist  thou  spread       210 
Like  to  the  Bay  Tree,  which  the  whole  yeare  springs. 
And  through  this  land  plant  a  whole  race  of  Kings. 

Crisp.    Nor  shall  he  scorne,  till  that  race  be  runne, 
To  call  himselfe  a  Prince,  yet  a  Shooe-makers  sonne. 

Shoo.     Of  the  Brittaines  blood  Royall  yfaith  boyes  :         215 
Let  no  man  therefore  henceforth  take  it  scorne, 
To  say  a  shooe-makers  Sonne  was  a  Prince  borne. 

Crispian.    Good  Fate  succeede  it :  brother  my  Master  hath 
told 
All  your  strange  proceedings :  have  you  heard  of  the  Procla- 
mations ? 

Crisp.     Yes,  and  meane  ere  long  to  use  it  for  my  profit.      220 

Crispian.     Till  when,  muffle  this  Sonne  in  some  darke 
Cloud, 
Whilst  I  at  Court  waite  on  the  Emperour, 
That's  gone  to  meete  great  Dioclesian ; 
Fortune  may  tume  her  Wheele,  and  wee  may  stand 
As  erst  wee  did,  and  with  our  owne  beames  shine.  225 

Crisp.     Play  you  your  game  at  Court,  the  next  trick's 
mine. 

Shoo.     And  by  Saint  Hugh,' 
Though  I  neither  shuffle  nor  cut,  He  holds  Cards  too. 

Wife.    And  He  not  sit  out,  though  I  turne  up  Noddy. 

Crispia.     Worke  wisely  then,  and  part.  230 

Shoo.     Doe  so  till  time  ripen,  which  being  knowne, 
A  Shooe-makers  subtile  wit  shall  then  be  shewne.   Exeunt. 

[Act  V.     Scene  2.] 

[The  same.] 

Trumpets  sound:  Enter  Dioclesian,  Maximinus,  Bassianus, 
Lutius,^  with  Drumme  and  Colours. 
•Texts,  "Latius." 


254  ^  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Ma\x.    Great  Dioclesian,  our  renowned  Brother, 
In  France  your  happy  and  tryumphant  deeds 
We  here  in  Brittaine  thus  congratulate : 
The  Vandall  and  the  Goth  we  heare,  have  paid 
S  The  price  at  full  for  daring  insolence. 

Diocl.    Even  with  their  bloods  they  have : 
Their  daring  and  their  downfalls  fill  one  grave, 
And  yet  our  Conquest  had  not  spread  such  wings 
But  for  those  Brittaine  forces  you  sent  o're : 

10  They  from  the  French  Field  pluckt  the  noblest  Flower, 
And  of  them  all,  a  Souldier  too,  whose  Fame 
I  cannot  sing  too  much,  carryed  the  name 
Of  Honour  from  us  all :  his  good  sword  flew 
Like  Lightning,  and  where  it  went,  ©'rethrew : 

IS  The  King  of  Goths  call'd  me  his  prisoner. 
But  then  this  brave  Opponent  fetcht  me  off 
In  ransome  with  his  blood,  and  that  being  done, 
He  like  a  Lyon  on  the  Vandall  runne : 
Tooke  him,  and  clos'd  the  battell  in  his  fall, 

20  The  worke  was  bloody,  rough,  and  Tragicall ; 
And  therefore  for  my  love  pray  crowne  his  head 
That  twice  sav'd  mine :  It  is  a  man,  whose  Fate 
Vpheld  the  glory  of  the  Roman  State. 

Max.    The  man  you  sent,  and  praise  so  Royall  Sir, 

25  Shall  ever  live  within  our  Princely  favour: 
One  call  the  Captaine  hither. 

Btts.    Here  he  comes.  Enter  Crispianus. 

Max.     Brave  Souldier,  your  high  spoken  merit 
Breath'd  from  an  Emperours  love,  claimes  due  regard 
From  his  and  our  hands  :  cast  therefore  but  your  eye 

30  On  all  the  Kingdome,  what  you  can  espye 
To  please  you,  aske,  and  take  it. 
Diocl.    Which  wee'le  confirme 
Brave  Crispianus,  make  thy  princely  boone 
Worthy  thy  fame,  and  such  as  may  beseeme 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleinan  255 

Great  Maximinus  and  Dioclesian,  3^ 

The  Masters  of  the  triple  world,  to  give, 
And  by  our  gods  thou  shalt  the  same  receive. 

Cris.    I  humbly  thanke  my  Lords ;  He  aske  no  Gold, 
Nor  Lands,  nor  Offices ;  but  thus  high. 
To  beg  a  prisoners  life  and  liberty.  40 

Max.    A  prisoner  noble  Sir,  what  is  he? 

Crisp.     'Tis  a  sad  Oueene,  my  Mother  Royall  Sir, 
Imprison'd  by  your  Grace  at  Rochester. 

Max.     King  AUureds  Queene  thy  Mother? 

Cris.     Yes  my  good  Lord,  my  Kingly  Father  slaine,        45 
I  and  my  brother  did:,disguis'd  remaine, 
Till  I  was  prest  for  France. 

Diocl.     This  wonder  doth  amaze  me : 
Is  Crispianus  then  a  Kings  sonne  found? 
'Twas  voyc'd  abroad,  thou  and  thy  brother  dyed 
In  the  battell.  50 

Cris.    Fame  speakes  not  alwayes  troth :  I  live. 
But  of  my  brother  what's  become,  as  yet  I  have  not  heard. 

Max.    Thou  here  shalt  live  right  deare  in  our  regard ; 
Lutius  by  this  our  Signet  free  the  Queene  from  Prison, 
And  give  her  knowledge  of  her  Princely  sonne : 

0  were  our  Daughter  found,  so  much  I  love  thee,  55 
Thou  should'st  enjoy  my  bright  Leodice. 

Diocl.    We  thanke  our  Brothers  love  to  grace  our  friend. 
For  to  his  worth  we  can  no  gift  extend. 

Max.     What  shouts  are  these?    Looke  out. 

A  shout  within.     Enter  Nurse. 
Nurs.    Out  of  my  way  Sir  :  oh  my  heart !  60 

Max.     Why  what's  the  matter? 
Nurs.     The  matter  say  yee?  pray  let  me  gape  a  little; 

1  was  out  of  my  wits  before  with  feare,  and  now  for  joy. 
Oh  my  heart,  I  thinke  in  my  conscience  I  have  not  so  much 
winde  left  in  my  belly  as  will  blow  out  a  Candle:     The  65 
Princesse,  the  Princesse  Sir. 


256  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Max.    Ha  ?  my  Daughter  ?    Say,  where  is  she  ? 

Nurs.    O  my  sweet  Lambkin's  found,  and  come  to  Court 

too. 
Max.     Where?  who  found  her? 
70      Nurs.    A  pretty  handsome  stripling  by  my  Holy  dame; 
her   owne   Shoemaker  belike,   poore  (duckling:    'she   was 
wandring,  and  he  met  with  her ;  and  belike  shee  had  worne 
out  her  shooes,  and  he  fitted  her  finely:  so  drew  on  her 
shooes  first,  and  drew  her  to  Court  after;  and  he  and  all 
75  the  Company  of  the  Gentle  Craft  Sir,  brings  her  home  most 
sumptuously. 

Maix.    With  Musicks  sweetest  straines  conduct  'em  in, 
Our  sorrows  wither,  as  our  joyes  begin. 

Miisick:  Enter  Shoomaker,  and  other  in  their  Liveries,  then 
Leodice  and  Wife  with  the  Child:  Crispine  hare-headed 
before,  Barnaby  and  the  rest  after:  Leodice  kneeles, 
and  Maximinus  embraceth  her. 

Max.    Life  cannot  be  more  welcome;  which  is  he 
80  Doubles  my  joyes  in  my  Leodice? 

Nurs.    This  is  the  youth  that  doubles  'em: 

0  my  sweet  Honey-suckle,  have  I  found  thee  agen? 
Max.     He  treble  his  rewards  for  finding  her: 

And  to  be  sure  my  Daughter,  not  to  loose  thee  more, 
85  Great  Emperour  see 

To  doe  all  honour  unto  this  Prince,  and  thee, 

1  give  my  onely  daughter  for  his  wife. 
Lead.    His  wife  my  Lord  ? 

Max.    Ey  my  Daughter : 
Though  a  stranger  to  thee,  hee's  a  Prince  borne, 
90  Sonne  to  a  King,  and  well  deserves  thy  love. 

Leod.     Here's  one  deserves  it  more,  he  sav'd  my  life 
When  I  was  almost  dead  with  grief e; 
These  can  witnesse  it. 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  257 

Bar.    'Tis  very  true  Sir;  when  shee  was  the  lost  sheepe, 
He  was  the  Shepheard  that  found  her;  95 

When  she  was  a  cold,  he  cover'd  her; 
Nay  more,  when  shee  was  hungry,  he  fill'd  her  belly : 

Wif.     Here's  one,  if  it  could  speake,  would  be  a  wit- 
nesse  to  that. 

Leod.    And  by  the  Proclamation,  your  selfe  are  bound 
To  let  this  young  man  marry  me :  100 

He  sweare  He  wed  with  none,  except  this  Shoomaker. 

Max.     Sure  her  sudden  fright  hath  made  her  mad : 
Was  she  not  f rantick  when  thou  foundst  her  first  ? 
Nay,  shee's  mad  still;  how  dare  you  stand  this  scorne? 
This  is  a  Prince,  that  but  a  begger  borne.  105 

Leod.     A  Beggar?  looke  on  this  Babe:  'tis  his  owne; 
'Tis  Princely  borne,  and  a  Shoomakers  sonne. 

Max.     Fond  Girle. 

Leod.     Good  Father  heare. 
You  know  not  what  brave  men  these  shoomakers  are. 

Bar.     'Tis  knowne  we  can  get  Children  Sir.  no 

Max.     How  am  I  vext  with  fooles  and  mad  men! 

Leod.     I  doe  beseech  you  Sir,  my  Royall  Father, 
Take  this  lovely  Child  to  kisse,  and  blesse  it. 

Max.     Defend  me  lupiter,  shee's  mad,  starke  mad. 

Diocl.     Why  does  the  faire  Leodice  so  vexe  115 

Her  Kingly  Father  with  so  base  a  brat? 

Oris.     Zoonds  base? 

Shoo.     Peace  knave,  peace;  what  wilt  thou  doe? 

Leod.     Base  Brat?    Alas,  had  the  poore  foole  a  tongue 
Or  power  to  speake,  hee'd  sweare  you  did  him  wrong : 
By  all  our  gods  it  is  as  nobly  borne  120 

As  the  proudest  here. 

Max.     Strange  frenzy. 
Why  does  my  Daughter  so  dishonour  me  ? 

Leod.     I  take  but  this  poore  Childs  part,  and  so  should 
you: 


258  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

For  looke  you  Father,  this  base  Brats  Mother 
125  Lay  in  my  Mothers  belly;  were  shee  alive, 

Shee  would  acknowledge  it,  and  comfort  give, 
And  it  shall  call  you  Grandsir  if  it  live. 

Max.    Here's  strange  and  darke  Enigmaes, 
Speake  plaine,  whose  Child  is't? 
Leod.     This  shoemakers. 
130      Max.     And  yours?     'Slife  he  has  layne  with  her, 
Shee's  his  Whoore ;  attach  the  Villaine, 
Tortures  shall  force  his  basenesse  to  confesse  it. 

Cris.     Most  Royall  Soveraigne,  suffer  not  wrath 
To  kindle  in  your  bosome,  his  [^indicating  Crispianus.]  base- 
nesse and  mine 
135  Runne  even  in  one  streame :  it  is  my  brother. 
Princes  by  birth,  the  King  of  Brittaines  sonnes ; 
Our  names  Elred*  and  Offa,  for  these  names 
Of  Crispine  and  Crispianus  we  biit  borrowed 
To  keepe  our  lives  in  safety. 
Max.     Can  this  be  true? 
140      Leod.     Father  it  is,  and  this  long  since  I  knew, 
Lov'd,  and  then  married,  a  twelve  Moneth  since : 
This  token,  could  it  speake,  would  tell  you  all. 

Max.     Whom  Heaven  would  save  from  danger,  ne're 
can  fall. 
My  blessing  compasse  both :  nurse,  what  say  you  to  this  ? 
145      Nurs.     Nay,  I  was  asleepe  when  'twas  done  yfaith. 

Diocl.     Shee  winkt  a  purpose.  Enter  Queene. 

Lut.     The  Queene  my  Lord. 

Max.     Most  welcome,  and  most  wisht  for,  Royall  Prin- 
cesse, 
Your  fetters  of^  imprisonment  wee  here 
150  Take  off,  goe,  imbrace  your  sonnes. 
Quee.     O  my  deare  sonnes! 
Max.     With  them  receive  your  Daughter  to  your  love: 

*Texts,  "Eldred." 
•Texts,  "off,". 


A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman  259 

Wonders  hath  f alne  since  you  have  a  Prisoner  beene ; 
You,  and  your  Sonnes,  and  we  are  growne  a  kinne. 

Quee.     Fame  spread  abroad  the  wonder,  and  the  fame      155 
Of  our  dread  Lords  the  Emperours,  which  in  stead  of  death 
Hath  given  an  happy  passage  to  our  Hves. 
But  Royall  Sir,  should  I  forget  this  shooe-maker, 
We  breake  a  bond,  wherein  we  all  stand  bound : 
My  somies  of  you  hath  loving  Parents  found.  jgo 

Shoo.     Faith  Madam,  I  did  the  best  I  could  for  'em:  I 
have  seene  one  married  to  the  Emperours  daughter. 

Bar.     Wou'd  you  had  marryed  me  no  worse. 

Max.     You  all  have  done  your  best 
To  make  our  comforts  full :  for  which  wee'le  pay 
Rewards  to  all,  and  crowne  this  happy  day.  165 

Bar.     Wee  have  a  boone  my  Lord  the  Emperour. 

Max.     What  is't? 

Ba/r.     That  seeing  these  two  Princes, 
Fellow  servants  with  us,  being  of  the  Gentle  Craft, 
May  have  one  Holy-day  to  our  selves. 

Max.     What  Month  would  you  have  it  kept  in?  170 

Bar.     The  five  and  twentieth  of  October, 
That  none  of  our  Trade  may  goe  to  bed  sober. 

Max.     Take  it: 
These  lines  of  Fate  thus  in  one  circle  met, 
If  Dioclesian  please  shall  here  close  up.  ^75 

Dioc.     In  what  circumference? 

Max.     Thus;  'tis  more  honour 
To  make  Kings,  than  be  such :  then  let  these  twaine, 
Being  English  borne,  be  Brittaine  Kings  againe. 
This  in  the  North  shall  rule. 

Dioc.     This  in  the  South: 
Brave  Crispianus,  to  requite  thy  deed,  ^°° 

Great  Dioclesians  hand  shall  Crowne  thy  head. 


26o  A  Shoo-maker  a  Gentleman 

Max.    To  Crispine  this  :  and  this  rich  gift  beside ; 
A  Crowne  presented. 
The  faire  Leodice  to  be  his  Bride. 

Crisp.     I  have  an  humble  suit  unto  your  Highnesse. 
185     Max.     What  is't  my  Sonne? 
Crisp.     'Tis  this; 
A  Church  then,  and  a  beauteous  Monastery 
On  Holmhurst-Hill,  where  Albon  lost  his  head, 
Offa  shall  build ;  which  He  St.  Albons  name, 
In  honour  of  our  first  English  Martyrs  fame. 
190     Max.     Build  what  Religious  Monuments  you  please. 
Be  true  to  Rome,  none  shall  disturbe  your  peace. 
Set  forward  Princes,  Fortunes  Wheele  turnes  round; 
We  Kingdomes  lose,  you  the  same  houre  sit  Crownd. 
And  thus  about  the  World  she  spreads  her  wings, 
195  To  ruine,  or  raise  up  the  Thrones  of  Kings.
