Requested Title: CALIG ULA
Authors: John Crowne
Matched Alias: Caligula
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_caligula-a-tragedy-_crowne-john_1698
Source Title: Caligula. A tragedy,...  1698
Source Author: Crowne, John
Source Date: 1698
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/caligula_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from validated standalone Internet Archive OCR; the item metadata is clear although the title-page OCR is degraded.

---
To the Right Honourable
HENRY tarlof RUMNEY,
Maſter-General of -- the Ordnance, Lord
Warden of the Cinque-Ports, Gentleman of His Majeſty's Bed Chamber, and one of the Lords of His Majeſties moit Honourable Privy-Councal, &c.
My: Lord, | N.addreſs of this kind, from a Man fo idle and unuſefull asI am, is at all times unſeaſonable ; ro a Perſon, whom the Wiſdom © the King, and the good Fortune of the King- dom, employ in ſo many great” Afﬀairs, as take up your Lordſhips hours.” But it can never be more out of time, than now : when your Lordſhip is in ſorrow, {or the loſs of your Brother, the late great Farl of Leiceſter, who mourns not, that knew him ? All that knew him, lov'd him, if they lov'd mankind ; for, a@igreater Example of hur.anity,the World, I believe, has feldom found. * A!l honour'd him, that knew him, it they valued Truth ard Wiſdom : ſo much gccd ſence fel] from kim, in Iis cormon Converfarion, tha none convers'd with: him, but were both Enterta:n'd and Impiov'd, if they were capable of it.” : And7no doubt, m-vy creat Men were the greater for his Acquaintance ; and thus, tho? in & private Lite, he influenc'd the pubkck : and the whole Kingdom wis the betrer for jm. Some ſurvive themſelves, and ther Underftandinzs dic before *ein,- Hts mind retain'd jcs wondertull vigor to tlie latt. be was pleaiznt-o ab, when yeers and pains Fad taken'all pleaiires from him, but what he found in doing good of -kis bounty, 1 have rt- ten ſÞar'd, and ſo have many more. And, I was always extrean prod of any warksot favour from Ay an impartial and difcerr
AS The Epiſtle Dedicatory. = x Judge. I cou'd dwell-on fo pleaſing a ſubjeQt, as the extraordi-- nary Qualities of this-great Noblema-; but fince, Providence thas-ra- ken him from theWortd;, to numberuphisdeferts and” vertues were but to ſet before. your Lordibip your- loſſes, and the misfortunes of the Kingdom. Now Iam entring 0n another copious ſubje& ; what does this Kingdom owe your Lordſh:yf you bave been in ſeveral Reigns, one of the greateſt Ornamegts of Erg/ara%; but you have of late þcen, one of its fortunate preſervers : y ordſhip was an eminent Inftrument in this Reyolution,: which» by been ſo happy. to England, and the greateſt part of Exrope. , Had not this change been,. almoſt all Eargpfe had been overrun by. Frakte , Eiglend, tor certain, had Joſt its Rights, Liberties, and Rehgjon, _ perhaps, been no more a Kingdom, but a Provinceto Frazce, a Vaſſal to Vaſ- fals, and far all 'its Wealth had nothing but a Wafer. What tou'd have ſtop'd that inundation of power, which was rolling on; and {welling as 1t rolPd, delug'd many parts of Exrope, and threatned all? What cou'd. a formidable Fleet andArmy, almoſt ingumerable, have ask'd of a few divided Ccunſellors, at White-hall, which they durſt | have deny'd? And whata glorious figure does England now make, * in compariſon of what it did tome years ago ? 'It lay one Reign be- salm'd in Luxury : In another Fettet'd : In this Rexgn it has not on- ly-freed it ſelf, but humbled France, and proteQted. Germany, Spain, and He/lard, and appearsone of the greateſt Powers in Chriſtendom. How much then is owing to-your Lordſhip, by -whoſe Wiſdom, and Courage, this Revolution was contriv'd and carry*d-on ; "in a Reign, when the leaft oppoſition to uniimited power, 'wasjudg*d an unpardonable Crime ? But, I may quit this ſubjeQ, fince what your Lordſhip has done, will make a noble part of Exg/ſb Hiſtory. - In this Play, I ſet Tyranny before the Eyes of the World, and the dreffull Conſequences. of lawleſs and boundleſs power. But ſome _ wou'd not have the World frightned with ſuch a Figure nor an I- mage of a'Government profan'd, which they adore : *Tis well for 'em, that they worſhip an unknown God. It their Dwellings and E- - - ates, (if they-have any) lay in the reach of a mighty Prince, whoſe Willis Law,I bekeve, they wou'd beglad it they were ſecur'd from For- reign Invaſions, by the Engliſh Seas ;. and from boundleſs power at home, by Ernzlifh Laws. Ihave ſuffter'd ſeverely, and therefore ma be allow'd to ſpeak. The Fayour, ,or rather Authority, which a mighty Neighbouring Kingdom, had in our Court ſome years ago, : got my Inheritance, which, tho' itlay inthe Defartsof America, would | | d lave
off The Epifthe Dedicatory. ; have enabled me (if I cowd have kept it) to have liv'd at my eaſe in theſe beautifull parts.o* the Warld;..the loſs.of.; : land a Deſart to me. No wonder then if I am pleaſed with the Snc- ceſſes of our Wiſe and Valiant King, who was born to free and do juſtice to oppreſt mankind : and, I hope, to my felf, And now, I doubt nor, but your Lordſhip, -who has been fo inſtrumental in pre- « ſerving andeſtabliſhing the Liberties of all Ezgliſbmen, will alſo per- mit a Poet to enjoy Poetigk Liberties, I-mean, that leave which has been long granted, of aGrefſing 0 - op Men as a-gur Lord- ſhip, for your Favour..and Prote&ionM. I need ement
from others, becauſe I have none from my ſelf. No Man canhave _ *
a meaner opinion of me, than'I have of + my ſelf. I am oppreſt by wy ſelf, I will not fay by my modeſty, for modeſty is a vertue; and modeſty and pre. ip" inconſiſtent ; ngy fortune has long languiſh- ed under an unmanly ſpiritleſs temper of mind, which makes me rather chooſe to ſuffer than give trouble to any : nay, than to the favour of thoſe, who take a pleaſure in oblging. A Poet ma very well hope for Patronage from a Nobleman, who 1s of the blood of Sir Philip Sidney. And {have found your 'Lordihip ready. to jal- fiſt me : your Lordſhip addreſtto the. late Queen of ever=bletfied Me mory, in my behalt. And, by your mtercettion, T had a krge (hare of her Princely Bounty : and, no doubt, I ſhow'd hawe chad more, rf England had longer enjoy'd her. And now, my Lord, 1' humbly veg your Lordſ{hips favour, not . for this Play, but my celt'; ar-leaft,. that "1 have leave thus publickly to .honaur my felt, with xhe Titie z |
My Lord, 1 _ Lord{bips Moſt bumble an | Moſt. thankfull Servant:
John Crowne.
THE
o « - 4 1 - © 4 , ' « 2 - . # b, . G \ ; | # , % - 4 - & * _ # = 4 . .- 4 « # a "
o
Py ? 4 \
. : bo we /
d 22:9" X 1:0. iſ:
od £0 . brie © S177 | 2129 THELE 48 | | | . b . Mm "
buo'd a1; OW | | {<= blame the World for eny unkindneſs I receive from it, I ſel-
dom make any court to'it. > And I have jo much affetted retirement
and ſollitude, that « Writing of mine, like an Inſcription on a Wall,
& Belſhazzar's Feaſt, comes from an nnſeen Scribe. And the Jude ment paſt on Balſhazzar, and my Emperor 1s in ſome meaſure the ſame : Thou: art 'weigh'd .in the balance, and art found too light. Mary Jo, thene is .more leuity in the Charatter of this Emperor, that ſuits with the dignity f Jo great a Prince, and the gravity of Tragedy. But with what does the Emperor ſport himſelf. ? with the honour of WV omen, the for- tune and lives of Men, and the-ruin- of Nations. And I thought there was ſo much good nature among- mankind, * that Spettators would have trembled, when they ſaw . Kjngs and —_ forc'd to yield up their Rights, Religions, Laws, and Gods, to the Luſls and Frenzies of a young fantaitical Tyrant, and all the World at the diſpoſal of a mad Man. But to pleaſe, T ſhowd have ſhewn a more beautifull fgure. So I have in Va- lerius aud many other Characters in this Play, TI have alſs beautified the Emperor's Charatter, and all parts of the Play, with as much _=_ Senſe and Poetry as are in anyof my writings : For I will compare my ſelf only with my ſelf. And few of. my contemporaries have pleasd the World mich more hes I have aone, both in Tragedy and Comedy, But many ſay, the Play
wars
hs.
The Epiſtle to the Reader. wants Plot 1, 1 confeſs, 1 think it \loes, 1 bave pat little more into" the Play, thanwhat I found taken oat of Hiſtory. All the Charatters and moje of \ the Events in the Play, T have' taken” out" of Hiſtory ; and I have made as lively Jmages, of what 1. forrnd there, as I believe can be done by any Man, This was unknown, #t ſeems, to a great part of my Auzitrce, therefore they condemn'd the Charatter of 'Nitellwus ; bis flattery to the Em- peror and caurtſbip to the Empreſs : particularly his begging 4 Sandal of hers, 45. 4. reward for his Services, aull whin he had'it, hs carrying "it in his bolome, and ſometimes kiſſing it. This was « Compleyient he made to Met(- falina, #he 'd Lewd Wife of the Emperor Claudius, ' By his flatteyy and addreſſes in the Reigns of three or four bloody Tyants, he kept himſelf wot only ſafe and whole ; but raiſedhis fortunes to ſuch. a heighth, that his Sor Aulus' Vitelhus, who had mot one good quality, came to be Emperoy of Rome. .:1 thought moſt Gemlemen had more il in fliftory, Portyy Court{bip,” and Adareſs 40. Greatneſs than Þ percebv® they have. But," will "I dp by contending. .' I confeſe;l wrote this Pley, when I was under great aiſorder, nat in mind." "For I never loyd nach any pave of this World, but a Friend, and meric in 4 Friend or Enemy. I never ſought more than the bare conveniences of life. But want of health makes life it ſelf an inconvenience. TI have for ſome few years bee diſorder 'd with a Diftemper, which ſeated is ſelf in my head, threatned me with an Epilep« ſie, _—_—_y took from me not only all ſenſe, but almoſt a!l ſigns of life, in my intervals I wrote this Play. Therefore if it have any Wit or Poetry in it, I wonder how they came there. But many of the firſt rank, both for Quality and Under landing, have ſaid they were pleaſed with it, and therefore T value it. Now I will [ay one wordin defence of my Morals, cannot but take notice of Joe lines I have read in the Preface to the Poem calPd King Authur, -where the World is told,that all who have written _ the Author of the Mourning-Bride,mw4y be «[ham'd, fince for want of « enius, they have depended on bawdy for their ſucceſs ow the Stage. I much commend that Gentlemay's weſijgn of Reforming the Stage from Ob- cenity, Immorality, and Profaneneſs; But 1 wb be had tahen more care of his Pen : I mean not in his Poem. IT will not quarrel with that, Fo it ave me cauſe, In my notes on a Play call the Empreſs of Morocco([call em mine becauſe above three parts of four were written by me) I gave went 80 wore ill-nature in me than I will do again. But I am ſorry that the Learned Author of King Authur, who labours ſo commenaably for Vertue and Morality in Plays, Poul ſet an ill Example, and injure Truth and the
The Bf6 te toxhe 6 Nadder
ful <8 27et AY ) Sir Courthy Nite, INS 4s ir fortunate + Coma antlids been written.in hood Age reeGnny fs _ aka clean tn his Conr'
wddian = 1a
wr Sb pF eld the weremritren by 4——> But they were \Printed long before my area Kai \Pown; call'd the Seflions.of Poers, fe, not with 2790 Ir gu Seems with\duimeſ; and want of Witand Pottry, which'be node dons ry tirey ad been furs on. .* But (ince there:1s t00- much) Atheifur lays; apo ' content \they fhow'd" be thought not prine,-,ornok goa wIyy A had rather whawd wor its "—_— thay employ any hore: ye th: a can, wonher wha
| wa IVF.
LH 6 A v1 Pt þ4 <Y V 3 YU bk 4 4. z\ z\ 113 ' AL? 1 . » « kd 6% % *s \ z \ '% L s \ . . - m 3\ , 1 , i p , __ , _ an I)" *® $4 + IQ. 7 ih —_—_— had {7 1 \ DS I &\ D $1 "4 I\.3, ( \ IEEE A i | 2 >», *LOIRR wh A a (bv WS 38K RY KUL AOIAPLTTY EAR . > \ \. . } 4 £ A = 14 7 'A V vw)" 41 A» CAL A 3s 4 &y % —_ Kg hy 1 91 d > IQ. ? 3% 2z ea 47 '» Þ dls, BOO ALLIES 4, 5 RD ALAS Y | ; F ps *. iu % * PO TORI TER" 005 WT ORAL « ik WE ETC: Ak k v3. 1% # A . MLTi IS THIS | 0 ” _ = G_ — 4A \ CY TJ by vv % h  S 4&4 - by 2d L \ 4 w\ a vor. 4 £- ( b ., L140 RF Ry WRAY, . Oo TER AUT LAT QRAT, $I. wt he TP5h NEL OE BOT 131A QA KA L . o , e , PO i = LES. SHS [. i *" % \ . , © KK +%% JC 7 Q ALYz3. & »Y DO A-Bnirnt {8F F ya! , aik. 9 4 & wm Weuwi WW WRW2.% KI ALRUINR * go IL J . , L
—_--
'F - * ol £ ».\ TERS: T3 + 0 ks. KEY A\ \ +»? Fa
ri ee <6. A 1-24, EPA FT oo
(4)
'
— WT
ACT the Firſt, SCE N E-the Imperial Palace in ROME. |
Enter, at ſeveral doors, Valerius Afiaticus, «nd Annius Minutianus.
al. A. Y noble Lord Minatians, I'm glad to ſee fo good a Man alive, And wonder at it ; for as the times are, When any good great Man has a new day, He has new life, at leaſt a new reprieve; For by the Emperor he's decreed to die. ' An. 24, Indeed, my Lord, ev'ry new day to me Seems a new pleaſing ſhining Prodigy : ' I lift my eyes with wonder at the Sun Nor look to ſee him-more when day isdone ; .And when night comes, I am awhile afraid Pm not alive, but inth'Infernal ſhade. Val. 4. Ceſar has broke the Fortunes, and the Hearts Of half the World ; Men are but half alive. An. 14, Sometimes your Lordſhip-gives our hearts ſome hope, But then your League with C2/ar frightens us, Val. A. Oh! twoproud Men to Friendſhipne'r encline ; You may as well two lofty Mountains join, If cloſe in League Ceſar and I appear, It is becauſe you do not ſee us-near; So when imperfeftly remotely ſeen, Two Mountains on each other ſeem to lean ; Approach 'em near, you'll find *em wondrous wide, Int'reſt and Nature do the-great divide : - Pride isa friendleſs Vice, 'and foe to Pride, Pve had ſucceſs in War, and got renown; And Ceſar hates all glory but:his own; [Enter Caſſius Cherza viewing himſelf in 4 Pocket Looking-glaſ:. Why, how now Caſſi« ? _ © Ca,Ch, My moſt noble Lord ! Val. A. Examining thy Figure - a Glaſs ?
That
- (8)
That Glaſs is a diſſembler, Caſſius. __. Thou wou'dſt not love it if it told thee truth, For then the Thadow on that Dialſhhewn, ©" Wov'd ler thee know thy Sum-ts going town Trart in thy fall, witneſs thy falling hair, . Yet thou wou'dſt paſs for young. with ll the fair, - Oh ! Caſſivs ! thou haſt wander'd far from Youth, . And th young Fong —_—_
Cch'art in heart a , r, who wou'd gueſs,. Willie art a wanton Frir bs" ty are? F, Paris was not accoutred with ſigh Art, Thy habit is a Libel on thy Heart.
An. M, Oh ! . but a Manly daring Soul lurks deep,” Under this gentle Lady, like : : Which Ceſar takes a pleaſure to deride,
Val. A. Nay, Ceſar ought to ſpare hida' allow, Ceſar's grave, 0Mly-in his frawning brow ;
He folds his brow in-frowns ; hed he his will, Baſilisk-like- he'd with, his aſpect kill. ; - -//
But this fierce Monarch, in unmanly-dreſs,
Is oft extravagant to mad exceſs, wes His Robes, like Ghryſtal waves, eround him flow, . At once his Limbs and Luſts they, lewdly ſhew. I His only coverings, in-his wald attire =
Are blazing Gems, which make-hin ſeem 9f fire, -
His wriſts in Bracelets far out-thine the Stars; -
You'd think *em Comets, and fear Plagues and Wars:
An, M.Ay, and his Sandals powder'd o'r with Gems, . Exceed in ſplendor -Regal Diadems. "4.
Val. A. They are fo wondrous foft, . and-eake too, .. © He feels the ground no more than if he flew.
Ca. Ch. Dreſſes are Politicks of: Love ; he's wiſe,
And ſteals to heartsof Ladies, nn their Eyes. > \
Val. A. Were Caſſius lcd to die, he'd die well drefs'd,,
To leavea Dart in ev'ry Ladies, breaſt;
And to his death he'd gracefully advance, .
As if he onlylead a ſolemn Dance,
And loſs of fe wow'd-grieve him lefs, be'llLown, . Than loſs of love; the dead are loy'd by none.
Ca, Ch, No, from dead Loyers: living beautics fly, And ſoon let all remepybrance- of *erh-die, - ©, | Our Images for years in Marbledtay:; -. | Our Images. in Hearts-ſcarce.laft a day. _
Val. A. Well Caſſins, though you ſoft and frail appear, Caſſius is hardy, valiant, and ſincere : ' 3,
> Calm
.. * -  \O0Y Calm to's Friend, a tempeſt to a Foe, | With his hand aQtive, though in Ipeech he's low, He fights as if he had a thouſand Lives, But for preferment. modeltly he ſtrives. In Court he yields, in danger-leads the way ; Wins, yet can ſcarce be ſaid to'gain the day. Of ſpeech he's ſparing, lib'ral of his bloud ; To all, but to himſelf, he's juſt and good. Ca. Ch. This from your Lordſhip ? I am over-paid For all I've done. Val. A. No, there are great Arrears Due to thy-Fortune, and thy Honour both, Injur'd by Ceſar. Ca.Ch. Iam wounded by him, In a more tender part, my Conſtience ; He often forces me; to ruine thoſe Whom I am bound in conſcience tp defend. Tae fortunes, nay, the fleſh I'm forc'd to rend Of thoſe, who have _no faults, but Wealth or Power ; And thus my ſelf I torture ey'ry hour, ' For all the miſeries I impoſe, I feel ; And my heart bleeds-when guiltlefs blood I ſpill. Becauſe I faintly a& this cruel part, Ceſar is pleas'd to ſay I want a Heart, And has my tenderneſs in great diſdain ; He thinks I'm not a Man, becauſe Humane, Val. A. Nay, Ceſ«r counts humanity a crime : Well Caſfizs, oo may have _—_ in'time. Sar Several go over the Stage, carrying Roves ana Crowns. Behold a fooliſh oſtentatious ſhew, Wy 6 | Of Robes and Crowns, won -in the German War ; Not by the Valour of the Emperor, He neyer ſtoops in Petſon to ſubdue, He fights by Proxy. as great Princes wooe. He dares not leok on War.; awhile ago, He march'd to'ards War, and made a noiſe and ſhew, Which through the German Woods a horror ſpread; The haſty Rh;ne to Sea more '{fwiftly fled. He had two Armies. Ca. Ch, No, 'my Lord, but one. Val. A. Yes, Caſſius, 1 lead gallant Men, and Ceſar A flying Camp of ranting Concabines Who flam'd,and gave a luſtre to the day - No Meteors were ſo bright, or hot as they. Caf. Ch. Ay, but my Lord, theſe falling Stars, *tis known, _ Though bright aloft, are-Jellies when they're down. | B 2
Val.
- — —— ”
Fat. 4; That you have often found ; now what became v Ofthis Bravado, and attempt on Fame ? It dwindled to a Farce, and-fooliſh Scene ;. For his Light-Horſe, ba; Concubines I mean, With Ceſar in their head began to fly, On the firſt News the enemy drew nigh : To look on a brave Foe they durſt not ſtay, The German Trumpets blew *em all away. An. 14. They have fome wounds I'm told. Val. 4: ln Fame they have, FR And ſcratches which the Quick-ſet Hedges gaye. Ceſar is often prancing,'on' the Road. To War, but long e'r danger is abroad, Like a hot early Spring he, oft ſets forth, Not to enrich, adorn, but blaſt the Earth; Whilſt ſweet young Beauties, in their lovely May, . Like bloſſoms round him blow,: but- far more gay :. And when I _ rudely threat The ſplendid Prince;.he-and his buds retreat ; He wiſely keeps in War a Regal'State, ; Makes danger from himſelf at diſtance wait, But with ſtiff pride enters an empty Town, His Troops have won, . and aſſumes their renown. Ca. Ch. Second-hand Glory appears ſomewhat bear, Val. A. Second-hand Cloaths he may as proudly wear. - With all their Lawrels then a Prince is crown'd,. Who ner ſaw fight, nor felt-a noblewound. Wounds he has had, but they were all behind, For yet-his face danger cow'd never find ; But he'll triumph in Perſon, o'r-the bold, For Vicories he never durſt behold. Now in triumphal pomp he enters Rex, Leading thoſe chain'd he durſt not overcome.: And now who dares but in a look betray, - The leaſt contempt of this illuſtrious day, - Sacred to th honour of th? [mperial Sword; .. And the vaſt pride. of -our'vain-glorious Lord? An. 24. You of his pride and vanity complain ;.. Oh ! wou'd to heaven he were only vain, But he has Vices I abhor to name; - , They cover m- with everlaſting ſhame, His Siſters were all wonderfully fair ; , Part of that beanty I defir'd toſhare, The youngeſt then ſeem'd to have ev*ry-grace ;; Her-beauty gaye a luſtre to her race. ' I humbly begg'd his leave: for an addreſs, And angry Heaven cursd me with ſucceb. - | E:
-
(9)
F-got his Siſter, and let that ſuffice To expreſs all the plagues Hell can deviſe. BY Heavens, he whor'd her on the Bridal Night ; ay, which is more, he whor'd her in my ſight. Val. A. She was his Siſter I may ſafely ſwear ;- No race beſides affords ſo lewd a pair. ; Enter Vitellius ſad and drooping. ” [pity this great Man, in War he's brave, In Court he is a cautious fawning ſlave. Caf. Ch. He views the ground with a dejetted eye. Val. A. And with good reaſon he expedts to die. An.1, For what offence ? He has rul'd Syria well, And humbled haughty Kings who durſt rebel ; As. Fame reports. Yal. A. Court deeps but few can ſound ;.. © Tyrants and Prieſts in myſteries abound. Perhaps their Arts will not the light endure, They ſtrike moſt awe, like Temples, when obſcure. This ſad and thoughtful Hero lets approach, Try if his painful wounds will bear the touch. My Lord Yitel;xs, you ſeem full of care, And out of .4ſ;a bring a cloudy air, Which weighs your Eye-lids down;what ſhou'd it ntean? You fortunes has been ſmiling and ſerene, And yet you ſighas if your heart wou'd break. _ Vit. My Lord, Pm bruis'd, I have ſcarce ſtrength to ſpeak ; Pve had a fall, which makes my Vitals bleed. I fell from Heaven. Val. That's a high fall indeed: Vit. From Ceſar's favour. (He bows low.) - Val: A. Why de'ye bend ſo low? » Vit. TOCeſar's Image in my thoughts I bow.. CHe always bows when he" names Czfar. - I honour my own thoughts when Ceſar's there, And when he's nam'd, I reverence the air, And lowly towards the awful ſound encline ; The air is then, methinks, a holy ſhrine. * Val. 4. Your prudent, courtly temper, I commend, But 1 had rather make proud Monarchs bend, And with crown'd Vitims my devotions pay ; So I wou'd worſhip Ceſar ev'ry day, And now bring Princes to adore his Throne. Ceſar's My Prince —— : Vir. And God. Val. A Well; that I own; To Ceſar Pll not grudge a pompous word 3 - - , And-how he pleaſes he ſhall be ador'd, [Shouts]. Fit.
.
(6) - Pit. Theſe ſhouts tell joyful news, that Ce/ar's nigh ; . Ot! Pye his glorious perſdn in my eye. His glitPring Chariot is of beaten Gold , Gm But in himf{eclt I Nature's pomp behold, (44
The bounteous Monarch, as he rides along,
Rains ſilver ſhow'rs on the admiring throng, .  Fal. A. Bribes to the Ra'\ble ; that a Prince To-proud,: [Aſide to . Shu'd ſtoop to purchaſe flattery fram the croud ; An, M,
From all bold Foes, but flatterers, he flics ;  Flattery i: a part of his high Euxumes, And none can be too fulſame for his taſte ; Thns Wir, and Gold, and Blond, we vainly waſte. . An. 14. Rome pours into the Covnrt a dazling Croud,
With an illuſtrious ſtream *ris overfiow'd,
1 dare not ſhew my ſelf in Ce/ar's ſight ;
My Lords farewel, may Fortune do you right. Ex,
Enter Caligula, Ceſonia, Attendants, Guards, Val. A. and Vit, retire at a diſtance, Cal. Ch. mingles with the Guard.
Cf. Welcome to Rome once more, my Mars, my Fove ;
Welcome from War,. to-Luxory and Love.
Well, 1 am pleagd to find they've taken care
To fill the Palace with a fragrant air. ; Cal. I have beſtow'd more odours, on theſe Rooms,
Than wov?'d, I think, perfume a thouſand Tombs. Ceſe Sir, why do you name Tombs ? Cal. Does it become
A Heroin, to ſtartle at a Tomh ? Ceſ. Nay, I cou'd dwell with pleaſure, on the Graves
Of Ceſar's Foes, or his rebellious Slaves.
I've a nice Noſtril, with,rich perfumes fed,
The leaſt offenſive yapour ſtrikes me dead.
] can endure no ſweets but what excel :
Yet of dead enemies 1 like the ſinell,
| » Cal. Well, it dead enemies can entertain, ; Thou haſt been gratify'd this laſt Campagne.
; [Val. comes forwar ds, and bows low
What wou'd you have Yalerius ? Val. A. What you pleaſe ; : 1 1am attending, Sir, on your decrees, p oy ' Vir. comes forward, bows low, then Covers bis head and face with
his Robe, tarris round, then proſtrates. bimſclf on the ground. Vit. Ceſar, Vi&orious, Gracious, Pious, Wiſe, The nobleſt pieaſure of our thoughts and eyes : Scourge of the proud, relief of all the © preſs'd : C::ſar, of Gods, the greateſt and the beſt.
At
(37)
At Ceſar's feet, I humbly pomes lie, To live his Vaſſil, or his Viatim die.
But I wou'd live (if that might be allow'd) To pay thoſe Off rings Pve to Ceſar yow'd ; Thoſe Divine Honours are to Ce/ar due, The only God that ſtoops to hnmane view,
Ceſ. Sir, in no Mortal all perfe&tions dwell, FI They've both been faulty, but they*ve both done well. That Lord in Germany has Battels won 3 [Pointing to Val. This made the Parthian King leave Babyhn, [ Pointing to Vir.
Croſs his Euphrates, and his ſwelling pride, To pay thoſe Honours he-till then deny'd, Ceſar's Divine proteRion to implore,
His Eagles, and his Images adore.
Vir, Madam, the glory wholly I diſclaim,
To Ce/ar's Divine Genius be the fame.
Cf. Let *em once more in Ceſar's favour riſe, For all that honour him I highly prize.
Cal. Thy Will is irreſiſtible, like Fate ; What makes me love thee at ſo mad a rate ?
Live both in the Commands you had before ; Now is there any thing you wou'd haye more ? ['Vit. riſes and bows low.
Vir. To kiſs your ſacred feet we beg your leave.
[Cal. offers his foot with ſcors. With humble thanks the baunty we receive.
Val. A. We muſt give thanks for ſuch affronts as theſe ;
And proudly humblog us below our knees. | [ Aſide, | [Both Liſs rhe Emperor's Sandal,
Vit, Oh ! how the World is with anEmp'ror bleſt; May I preſume to make one more requeſt ?
Cal. What is it ? ſpeak. |
Vir. The honour, Sir, to kiſs Tl” Empreſles Sandal ; -— but 'tis too much blifs, Alas ! 1] am afraid, Pve been too bold.
Cal Lucius, your Lips are common, 1 am told ; Oft to the Sandals of the fair you bend, q And to your joys from thoſe low Stairs aſcend.
Vit. Light, Sir, is common, fo is vital air, And often kiſs the Sandals of the fair.  » |
Cal. Well Lncixs, 1 am in good humour now, F And the great honour you have begg'd beſtolf.
Let*em adore you, Madam, at your feet.
Vit. Oh! bounteovs Prince ! |
Oh! Empreſs! heavenly ſweet, [He kiſſes the Empreſſes Sandal ;, ſo goes Val. ks | x _ Cal.
Fg
I;
8) - Cal. Come, . you wou'd in my bounty-once again: z
Speak Boldly, Man, I'm in the giving vein. Vit. 1d beg the ſhelbof that delicious fruit,
A Sandal ſweetned by that beauteous foat. EP Cal. Go fetch him one' with ſpeed. [Ex. 4 Lady. Vie. Tranſporting joy! .
-For ſuch a gracious God, who would not die ? 9 i [The Lady enters, and gives Vit. 4 Savaal.
Qh ! *twill recal my youth, perfume my breath, >
Reſtore my health when I am ſick to death,
Nay, when I'm dead, make life in me return ;
1 ſhall, to Kiſs it, leap oft of my Urn,
Cal, I once look'd round me as 1 paſs'd along,
And near me I obſerv'd'a mutt'ring throng,
And in their looks ſaw diſcontent appear,
Which grudg'd my pomp, as if it coſt too dear.
. Do not they know, that Ceſar cannot brook
The leaſt oftence, but in a word or look ?
They who will live, muſt not with Ceſar ſtrive,
Ordareto let me know they are alive,
Till my commands enliven, and inſpire,
And warm their boſoms, like Promethian fire.
Rome to amazing Inſolence is grown 4 |
No doubt, one ſpirit runs through all the Town,
Since Rome has but one proud rebellious Soul,
Which dares preſume my pleaſures to controul,
And in my pomp give mea ſecret check,
Wou'd to the Gods all Rome had but one Neck,
That 1 might cut of millions at a blow ;
Cherea, fling *'em to my Lions, go,
Caff Ch. Whom ſhall T fling ? |
, Cat. The Rogues I nam'd of late; | ES
PI filence Villains who preſume to prate.
Caſſ. Ch, Sir, on my knees ——
Cal. 1 know thouart afraid; | Fear not the ſtubborn Rogues, thou ſhalt have aid, Beſides they are in Fetters,
Cafſ. Ch. Soam ET. -
Sir, from arm'd enemies 1 wou'd not fly ;
But from obeying ſuch ſevere commands,
Humanity and pity bind my hands.
Cal. Haſt thou humanity, thou fearful ſlave ? mn
No, thou art not a Man, becauſe not brave.
al. A. Sir, Ihave found him brave. Cal. So have not 1, The Coward dares not ſee another die ;
When
| (.9) When I have forc'd him to ſtrike off a Head, The executed wretchlook'd not fo gead.” Val. A. Forgive me, Sir, if 1 am bold, And the dark thoughts of mutt'ring Rome unfold. Siahyou engage in Wars, which coſt you dear ; But, Sir, no reafons for thoſe Wars appear. Cal. Muit I give reaſons, Sir, for my Decrees ? 1 may do what 1 pleaſe, with whom'l pleaſe. Perhaps I burn proud Towns, and ſlaughter Men, Only to pleaſe my humour, Sir-— what then ? * When wild Convulfons divide ſtreams from Springs, Roul Hills o'r Hills, the Rabble'o'r their King ; Lift Common-wealths to Realms,ſink Realms to States ; What are all theſe, but Gambols 0? the Fates ? But to eternal Glory 1 addreſs In all my Wars, with infinite ſucceſs.” F.. for my Glory, ſeize on Regal Crowns ; To make my Glory blaze, burn wealthy Towns. The Gods, for Glory, Worlds from Chaos won ; The Gods, for Glory, kindled tp the Sun, And ſet that noble part of Heaven o' fire ; - Pm hourly urg'd by ſuch Divine deſire, Cef. Inglorious Princes are but half alive, And want a ſence worth all the other five. Ip Val. 4; The Pris ners,-Sir,, whomyou have doom'&to bleed, Have begg'd of me that I wou'd interceed Sir, with appeals to Heav'n, they all declare They mutter'd nothing, but a Loyal Prayer For bleſſings, on your Perſon, and-your Croqn,.. Ard admiration of yeur great renown. Cal. Am I delighted with a Fool's applauſe ? No more, by Jove, than were I prais'd by Daws: Fal. A. Sir, theſe Mens lives are below your regard, . They've ſent Petitions ; Sir, ſhall they be heard ? Cal. Ay-—Sing ?em.. Pal. A. Sing*em ? I've no skill in Song ; 'T ne'r ſo idly, Sir, employ my Tongue. Ceſ. Then were 1 Cefar, I wou'd have no ear ; 1 wou'd no troubleſome Petitions hear, Unleſs ſung to me with harmonious Ayres, - Cal. Prieſts ſing, and make an Opera of their Prayers. Val 4A. Sir, one thing more: Pm told by common Fame, From empty Bowels many murmurs came, The laſt Campagne trod all our Harveſts down; And all the Horſes, in or near _
You
( x0)) *You pred, to bring th'. Imperial Treaſures home::
Therefore the Farmers cannot furnilh Rome,
With what ſupplies they'reable to afford;
And here onr Granartes are.all devour'd.
And thus, Sir, by: your Wars,. you grind Mankind:;
” But you will let 'em have no Cornto grind, Cal; Damn em, they:reaver-fed ; the mutt"ring ſouns
Came from fuil Bowels 4 Luxury abounds.
War deſtroys Men,” but Luxury, Maokiad ;
At once corrypts:the Budy, and the Mind.
And thus, a jult revenge poor Brutes receive,
Who die for Rogpe that-deſerve not to live,
Rich Knaves will engroſs Corn, to raiſe the prices
And ſtarve Mankind, to feed their ayarice,
For harmleſs injur'd Beaſts Pye ſome remorſe ;
But my chief care is for my fay'rite Horſe,
That Animal is full of noble fire ;
Go viſit him, and how he fares enquire. [ToVit. who goesont. Ceſ. Heaven ! how we ſpoil the pleaſure, o' the day. Cal. ?T6 truc, my Love ; but we will ſoon be gay.
The falls of Nations, which fill Cowards with fears,
Shall but like Water-falls-delight aur Ears ;
And murm'ring SubjeQs ſhall, like purling ſtreams,
'But lull us deeper in our pleaſing dreams, [Ex. Omnes,
re ee ye Ce ren ne Ione a — CC _——
- ————  — — —— —— —  —  —  — — — —  — — — CCC Os 0 yn _ _ - _ « - > 4 A _ . _— _ _——— - _= <——— Drone - _ yr - _ — = - - — —_— —_ - \ \ \%
ae a len ee ee ee EE. LO ET . 2 — _ . ” = Y
> —
A'C TIL Enter Caligulz, Ceſonia, GuarB, and Attendants.
od es deep in Winter, yet methiaks the air ; Has an unnat”ral heat, I cannot bear.
Ceſ. Caeſar's ſwift marches have inflam'd his veins ; He drives with all the ſpirit that he reigns. I wenter riot you left me far behind, Mettoughts your, fiery Steeds outras the Wind ; Winds loſt their breath in giving Ce/ar Chaſe, His ſpeed ſeem'd-more a Rapture than a Race. When a high Monntain ſhew'd him to my Eye, I tear*d ſome Goddeſs ſnatch'd him to the Sky ; Then from my ſeatl oft fell cold and palc, Till I beheld him flaming in a Vale, Saw his bright Chariot, andhis glitCring Train, Flying like blazing meteors o'r a Plain :
His
(ur) His dazling Chariot, though a pond'rous mas. Of ſolid Gold, ſcarce bentthe tender Graſs, I'm apt to think there can no prints be found Where Ceſar drove, his Steeds ſcarce toach'd the ground: No, Sir, provok'd by their own. fire and you, They ran, rag'd, foamed ; 1 thought in Clouds:you flew. Cal. 1 love intemperance in all I do, All ſpeed to me but drowſie-ſloath appears, I thought I linger*d on the Road for years, And my dull Horſes did. not ron, but creep ; Fd have ſprung hither at one lofty leap. Had 'I my will, I wou'd range Lands and Seas. As ſwift as thought ; think and be where I pleaſe. The very minute begin my flight, Pd pierce all Regions, at @ ſtart, like light. | Cef. You'd range all Lands; new beautics to ſabdue ; For your deſires the World has not enow : And without toyl, you'd give a beauty chace, You wou'd but think, think in her embrace. Cal. We call Men conſtant, when they're dull and tame ; Thus imperfe&tion gets a noble name. * I have a heat which never can be cool'd ;. A ſpirit in me which can ner be rul'd ; It rages whilſt 'tis in my boſom pens, Nor can a thouſand Beauties give it vent. When 1 am deluging your Arms with bliſs, You never think me guilty of exceſs. e/£gypt is not more pleasd with flowing Nile , Burt if Iroveto others Arms awhile, Of my intemp'rance you complain aloud ; Though it be but a momentany flood, You think yow have a dreadful dearth in view. ; Madam, . was Ceſar only made for you ? : Cef, Jove had, no doubt, intentions more divine;} . But Ceſar will not be a-moment mine, My heart in Ceſar lives, to Cefar grows ;- . Therefore I never have an hours repoſe. ” Repoſe ? His many wandrings tear my veins, And give me wounds which have tormenting pains: Cal, You love an Emperor, that 1 Il not deny ; Who, but a Ceſar, can your heart ſupply With all the pleaſure, wealth, and pow*r-it craves ?”” Now you have Queens for your Domeſtick flaves, . And all delights that nature: yields in call ; Werethere more Emp'rors you wou'd love *em all,
C-2 Cel.
Om re rin nt pO _—
rt ec 9 a eons ae I
TD TI
Ou EOS EO EO
es as oo OTE 2 Oy
(12) ' * Cefe. No, Sir, of all Men; Emp'rars wou'd Iſhun;'* ll CER myſterious, underftood by. none. Do LH If But this | know, whatare fo/much above - All Kings on Earth,!.''tis arrogance to 19ve;, , I191\ And, to my ſorrow, :bhave fournidrit yain, NVO7T He , For havingM tbingsg all things they diſdain, | Ceſar is pleas'd with be uty, whallt *tis new, And the next hour thinks it not worth. his view. Awhile Pm graceful inthe Emp'ors thoughts,
_ And the next moment-ſeemn all-oyer. faults.
Now I've all beauties, then/Pve all decays; Now ſudden ſtarts of: » !then/ſharp-always; Now I'm in luxury: and thea' in tears, And-always ſhaken with confounding fears. Cal. Oh! my Ce/onja; prithee have a care, Impoſe not-on me more than] can'bear.
This Neck is ſoft, ſ@ is-not Cefar's Heart ;
This Head and Neck how eaſily can I part ? But though in Ceſar thou haſt no:delight, To thy fair 1eifctiau. art a:plcaling ſight ;. And by all Eyes thou art withwonder-ſeen-; Oh1 1am loath to ſtain ſo white a $kin; _ "Tis pity ſo much beauty ſhow'd beloſt; "Thou wilt not be ſo lovely yhen a Ghoſt. / "Ce. 1 find Pm pleaſing ſtil} inCeſar's Eye, And therefore now I'm, very:loth todie ; + No joys in the moſt ſweet Eliz5av Grove, Can equal the Remains of Ceſar's love. With pomp and- power I am pleas'd; Iown:; But Ceſar far outſhines his. glorious! hrone. Were Ceſar but my equal, were he lower, Had but that graceful-perſon,”'and nd more, From all Mankind to Ceſar arms:Fd fly, -BE5+ And think no Goddeſs isſo bleſt as'E; , i/. > Cal. Oh ! thou art made exaRly: to my mind, Fair to perſettion, fond though'munkind. Faithful thou art as the ſeverely chaſte, And- yet as YVenu wanton, when. embrac'd. I bave a thouſand YZenpſſes in thee: ; BY Once more 1 love thee to a mad degree: : New beauties for a moment. ſnatch-my Eyes, And entertainmez:whilſt theyre novelties. Ceſ. Ceſar will o&-abanddn me:1 know, - But one hours love will rich amends beſtow, I am luxurious, freely I confeſs, | But Ceſar, Ceſar is my Sovereign bliſs.
(13)
From Ceſar's Lips divine Ambroſia flows, His breath in ſweets excels the Syria Roſe; And when 1 have his Arms | think 'm dreſs k The Queen of Heaven has not ſo rich a Veſt, In Ce/ar's Arms inextakies I lie, ; Likea mad Propheteſs, entranc'd with joy; Whilſt a God fills me all my ſpirits fly.
Cal. No, my Ceſonia, 1 muſt do thee right, Thy ſpirit gives a life to my-delight, A livelief Beauty Ceſar ne'r enjoy'd, Thou haſt more life than all thy Sex enjoy'd.
Ceſ. Now I'm compog'd, and fit for great Afﬀairs, Your Glory muſt awhile employ my Cares.
Enter Valerius Aftaticus, Lucius Vitellius.
Oh ! come my Lord, tho”.in this laſt Compagne You gave us tvo much reaſon to complain, Your ſervice, for your fanlts, make great amends ; ' And 1 rank you among the Emp'rors friends. -
Cal. Tart proud, and therefore 1 think Czſar's friend,
Thy haughty heart can to an Emp'ror bend ; My => by Jove and Nature were beſtow'd, By ſerving me thou ſerv'ſt an Earthly God. Senators oft are of ignoble blood, , And all their ors the Off-ſpring of the.Croud ; Can thy proud heart endure thoſe Men-ſhow'd reign, Whom thou woud'ſt ſcarce admit :into'thy Train ? Will one ſo brave, by Cowards be controul'd ? And one ſo rich, let Bankrupts rule his Gold ? So Wiſe to Blockheads for Advice repair, In all the great Aﬀairs of Peace and War ; Depend on the reſult of empty. prate, And account Fools the Oracles of State.
Val. 4. 1 wou'd not be a ſlave; to flaves, 'tis true;
- Our Senators are ſolemn ſlaves to yog.
If I muſt ſerve, on Cefar I'd depend ,
For as the Ladies, who on Queens attend,
Are by the World Ladies of Honour ſtiPd, : Tho? of their Honour they have been beguil'd.
So, Sir, it Honour can to flaves-be due, | They're ſlaves of Honour, .who are ſlaves to you:
L. Vit. Spoke like a Nobleman, and Man o':{cnce ; %
"Tis an illuſtrious thing, to ſerye a Prince So great, ſo glorious, ſo renown'd, fo wiſe, . What Vaſlal wou'd not ſuch a glory prize ? Val. A. When he has Ce/ar's favour in purſuit, He'll lick the duſt beneath the Tyrait's feet. - [| 4ſide. » i
”
Ceſar's
(14)
 C'ofar's a God, and Car ſays I'm proud;
A God knows all the ſecrets of our blagd. Therefore, no doubt, Im oſtentations vain,, The CharaQters he gives me. Py maintain ;
| will be proudly faithful:to my truſt, -
To all Mankind I will ve proudly juſt :-
All danger, Sir, Ill haughtily —_—
To ſerve you boldly fight, as boldly adviſe. Your ſervice to your plezſure 1 prefer, And boldly ſtop you, if I think yay err..
Cal. Stop me?
Val. A. By Councel, the'-it coſt my Head ;,.
Even by your ſelf I will not be mifted, |
Cal. Will I be judg*d, and govern'd by my ſlaves ?* . Pal. 4. Viljudge, and if Þ can Plt rule yogr Kaaves- 111 offer, and I'll ſuffer no abuſe,
Becauſe Pm proud ;, pride 14 of mighty uſe. The affeQtation of -a pompous name,
- Has oft ſet-Wits and Heroes jn a flame ;- volumes, and Buildings, and Dominions wide, Are oft the noble Monuments of prida. |
Cal. Then Pm your lofty. Building ? Have a cars;
This from no other Man on earth Pd beas. Thou rul'ſt thy Emperar, 1 know not: how ; More than thaw dar'it demand, dare beſtow, . Have all a Vaſlal can from pow'r-derive, Tho'tHart the boldeſt proudeft Man alive.
Val. A. All this I dur not have preſum'dto-crave; My thanks 11] on your foes in wounds cngrave...
Ceſ. In ſerving Ceſar, rich rewards proceed From the meer conſcience of the noble deed;
But yet is Ceſar ſo Divinely
He REEL or their blood.
Pm ſare, my Lord, your recompence is great, ToVYal. A, You've Rubies for your blood, andPearls for ſweat ; L
Yave Provinces for all the Fields Pave won, -
And Realms for 4ll the Kings yave undone.
L. Vit. Higher rewards thaw theſe my ſervice meets, This Province, Madam, ,. Fe rakes out of bis boſom rhr-Empreſſt 'Tis all c1er ſweets, 1 > "| | Sandal. Here dwelt a faot, a Wonder of . its kind, And left a thouſand fragrancies- behind,
Cal. How-falſe are Men, bath'in their Heads and Hearts And there is falſhood in alt Tradesand Arts.
Lawyers deceive their Clients. by falſe Law ; Prieſts, by falſ&Gads, keep all-the World'in.awe. .. as
—_—
a "
C 5) 'By'their falſe Tongues ſuch flatCriug Knaves are raig'd ; For their falſe wit, Scriblers by fools are prais'd. Whores, by falſe beauty, Yenuſſes appear ; HeQ'ring Faux —braves o'r Cowards, domineer : Look round the World, what ſhall we find ſincere ?
Ce/. The Senate, Sir, attend. _ Cal. Well, let 'em wait, How dare you, in my-Ear, name what I hate? PII have no Guardians, I'm at Ape to reign; What my Birth gave, my Courage ſhall naiatain. I will erdure no Partners in my Throne, 111 govern as I pleaſe, and rule alone. ' -Do not | trample Kings beneath my feet ? Will Cefar then let his own flaves be great ? Ceſar ſhall be the only Soveraign Lord, And Senate be a'vain and uſelefs word ; And'therefore wholly laid afide, ere long, Amongſt the Rubbiſh of the” Roman Tongye,
Val. A. Then will the name of Emp'ror be low; 'Sir, your Throne NRantls on golden Columns now, 'On Men who are by Birth and Fortune great ; Wau'd you beKing of Beggars, fix you ſeat On a vile Dunghil, on the dirty Croud ?
This by your friends can never be allow'd.
Sir, your miſtakes are your moſt dang'rous foes, And for your ſervice I'll your ſelf oppoſe,
And in the face of any danger fly;
You have not a more faithful friend than }: Comparl with Ce/ar's ſervice, how I flight Dangerand Death, I've often ſhew'd in fight.
Ceſ. Cheriſh bim, Ceſar.
Cal. Well, let quarrels ceaſe ;  TWaſt a great Genius, -both-in War and Peace.
But love not, if tl'art one of C2/ar's friends, A Senate ; for the very name offends. But call'em in, for they ſhall quickly know T have a farther quarrel with *em now. Enter the Conſuls and Senate, When Ceſar hy a Triumph honourd' Rome, How durſt you tarry ſullenly at home, As if my Vitories you proudly ſcorn'd, Or thought 'em curſes, and in darkneſs mourn'd ?
Val. 4. Who dares reply ? for to this raving Prince What can be ſaid, that will not give:offence ? [Aſide
Cor, The honour, Sir, we humbly did implore
To fill your Trunmphs, to be triumph'd or,
-
To
Shed C 16 ) WT 7 To be led Captives; but we beg in vain, ql "F- Our great devotion met yourthigh diſdain. | Lf Cal. *Tis true, I ſcorn'all honours you beſtow; And yon reſent th? affront; ha? is it ſo?. Con. That* were 'preſamptuous arrogance indeed; © Sir, with united hearts, we ve all decreed - The higheſt honours | Cal. How ? Dare you'preten To grant me Hononrs ?.'Honour muſt deſcend: | Con, We humbly beg —— - FIT 4 > - Cal. You'd beg me for aFool ; Beg me to own you have the Sovereign rule < By this Decree, you ſawcily invade Imperial Power, Imperial Glory ſhade. Afﬀronts from his own ſlaves; will Ce/ar bear ;. Refuſe, or grant me Honours, if you dare: Con, My errors wrong the Senate I perceive ; To ſhew our love we humdlp beg your teave. Cal. Your loze'? Mankind is/enviots yainand proud, Love nothing that's above**em, / bad or'g20d. | You hate a Prince, unleſs he'll tamely bear Partners in power ; let Senates have a'ſhare. Where Laws, and domincering Senafes reign,” Princes are ſlaves in purple, flaves in grain; Sword bearers to a-many-headed Lore :* [ mean the Croud, and weak"upon Record ; For evry Law made by the State, implies, That Princes are defetive; - Senates: wiſe. | Such Demi-Kings have haif your hearts, no more, ' While they have any flare of Soveraizn power ;_ But if a Prince entirely quits his Throne, He's lov'd by all, becauſe he's fear'd by none.” The Votes of Senators, ' tho*-ne*r ſo great; ' Shall but like Ecchoes my: commands repeat ; / So Forreſts may adviſe, and utter Law: L. Vit. The wiſeſt Monarch the Sun ever ſaw. Cal. Fear me, I care not how I am abhorr'd, Your hearts I'll have; with my Imperial'Sword, PII rip 'em from your Breaſts, when I think good: - In ſhort, VII have your Duty, or your Blood. | This you all know, and therefore-you'll obey ; Fears the Parent of-all Sovereign ſway, by Sr» Val. A. Sy with-triumphant'/pomp, to Court they've brought. . Your Image wrought'in > is that a/fault? Cal. My Image may have faults, '' the Gold has none ; 'Tis.th* only faultleſs thing below the'Sun...
#
Cef.
17 )
Ceſ. No, Ceſar, no ; if Art has done you right,
Th' Image is faultleſs 5r brang it in my vght
If Caſar's graces in the Image thine, .
There is no gold on Earth, ſo rich, ſo fine.
This ſhining) ſhadow, 4 wou'd feign behold/; -
This conſtant ſhadow _ d in ſolid gold. R f Enter Prieſts im Proceſſion ſinging, carrying 4 # Image 0
the Emperor, pond, j by Colts gt yak
The: $0NG, -Sung by the Prieſts.
th Mi ighty Prince, whoſe loud room Or -ev ry Region flies 3\ On whom with wonder Gods look down, And gaze with envious Whom, more than Hell, all Rarions fear, And more - as Heav'n obey'; Who o r-runs Kingdoms ev'ry year, . With Jove has equal ſway : Who ruins Realms, enriches Graves; © Makes mi ps Kings of rag ans
And Slaves of ings 5 - Hlis praiſe, «this I te With all devotion fongs.  .
Our bloody Wars are enged ;
The Sword is now
But worn for ſhew ; And the. ſtubborn bow unbended. Our hours of eaſe, and w- 2k , Wet di nate to pomp and
d Songs in.praiſe of-
hs IWar with glory ended.
The Sword $5 10w
But worn for ſhew; And the ſtubborn Bow unbended..
Now Peace begins to heal our wounds, And all our wants repair ; - Well Plough the Seas, and Plou ? uk Grounds, | an Plough the tempting fair * Our i y Towrs ſhall ſcale the Shy, Our Wealth unbounded, like our joy, Shall fly more free than air : Our Wars are done, And the World is won, So now farewel to an. TEx. om.
ACT
5 ” _ F. - #8 3 w# my m—_—_ - 5 , . 8 } P s 4 _ k 4 P< Ih 4 - wo & ; | * ,&
chin; had _ Ms +» rf "xt
= Xx CT, "TIE. of 2 | The S.C-E N-E.continnes: +
\- ©," Enter Valevius: Afiaticus, Annitis Minutianus,
An. op AS AR triumphs, atd'is by Rome ador'd, | rae nes wor-by - your victorious Sword. 4
Val. A. *Tis to triumphs he has ſmall pretence ;..
Put wou'd y'averme: proudly out-brave: my Prince, And boaſt ] won thoſe Fields hs'durft nor fee ?' This wou'd be fatal ſawcineſs:in'me. - | +
So}diers in fight their courage ſhow's diſplay ;. They have a trinmph whers they win.the day. Let them be brave againſt: the-bold and grear, Bvt humble to all thoſe beneath-their feer; - + +
An, M.” A ger'rons thought _ © Val. A. In moſt trinmphal ſhews;
A conqu'ring Coxcomb otr a beaten crows,
The fopp'ry in the Herg then appears,
The Lyon's couch'd, the, Aſs pri b-up his Ears; Vain oſtentation does too oft enſlaye, The learn'd, the wiſe, the mighty, and the brave. \ The Manof Learning, no contenr can reap . From all his knowledge, till he ſpreads the heap, And great applauſe, and admiration gains; - For that poor chaff, how he wilt thraſh his brains ? He is-in throws before, but then he's eas'd ; When he's a'\publick fool he's highly plead, For Fame vain Wits take all their-foartog flights ; For Fame the oſtentatious Hero fights ; » For ſhew, with wounds will be embroider'd o'r, And deeply died in his own purple gore. |
An. M.. Vain oſtentation deformsev'ry grace ;
”Tis like a bliſter in a beauteous face. OI,
Pal. A. *Tis hard to know, whoſe brains have wider flaws, They who ſit ratling chains, and. pleating ſtraws ; Or they who toy?, only for vain renown, | To wear in Hiſtory a paper Crown. Whiſſt Ceſar now, for a deſign ſo vain, Takes Poets and Hiftorians in his Train; How like a Lunatick this Prince appears, | "leas'd becauſe Belts hang jingling at. his ears? 7:15 he reſolves oblivion to ſubdue; .. -.,, 4the graces of his perſon.too, .
J
(12) In ſtrorfff and lively colouring diſplay'd, 'And in. bold Images, ſhall time invade. For this are famous/ Artiſts kept in pay, - And-Art brings forth dead Ce/ars ev'ry day,; You will ce all our Gardens and Abodes, .. And Temples crowded with thoſe filent Gods :' And for his likeneſs, he'll ſit brooding long, With all the pains that Birdsdo, to hatch their Young. An. 14. Well, this Campaign the Emperor-yentur'd far.; I think, he marct'd to the frontier of War. -- Val. A. Yes, and he bore ſome little Princes down, Whoſe fall will give no ſound to his Renown: , Their Provinces he might. with ale o'rerun: On my War-Horſe I could have leap'd o're one. An. 2M. Your Lordſhip is the Pillar of his Throne ; But, that's a truth Ceſar diſdains to own. Val. A. 1 ſuppott Ceſar ? Be not; fo profane ; | | 7 Ceſar's a God, to him all aid is vain.-: '/ + An. 24. Who can that impious Flattery endure ? His Father was a mortal Man, Pm ſure. _ Val. 4. His Godhead both-from Chance and Nature came; 'Tis a Convention in his Sacred Frame * ” = E Of Divine Atoms; it was not bepot, *T was an Original and glorious lot, . Thus his Atheiſtick flatterers hlaſpheme; Hum'ring their hot-brain'd Emperor's waking dream. Vaſt fortunes bred the frenzy, I confeſs ; | - Feeble mankind can ſuffer 1iÞ exceſ$:: | | Fortunes too high, or low, wrack humane thought, But fortune only has not been, in fault ; The Empreſs too, did her aſlifiynce joya, And often gave him Philters in'his Wihe ; Then this proud folly firſt begatt to Reign, Succeſſes turn'd, and drugs Diſeas'd his Brain. Enter Caflins Cherza , Caſſi«s, Vd raid thy fortunes, by commands, , But thou haſt Enemies, which hold: nay hands : | Howeer Illraife thy Honour, if: can, . - I do not know a more deferving Man. F Caf. Ch, "Im the eſteem of ſuch-a noble Friend; My Lord, I to an envi'd heightaſcend ;: 77 e: The Emperor's pleas'd to call meGoward, and Fool, Becauſe he always finds me ſoft.and- cool ; _ -. -: +. And alwaysflow in ſhedding gulltteſs hlood, Ceſar may give what titles he thinks good.
D 2 I've
F = i
M: !
is
{f
——_ —— c_m_
—_—_——— —_ Dy O——
— —
A - m _ OC IIISS — « A —  —— —— — — > << —— = — —— —— _— — == $> - = . —_— —: > + —— rMT == Cnr erts nn nn — ec— .
— _ —_— ———_—
_ - 2 - ES ee ee ee ann
STD _
_ ——_—_ —
_—
= JIE. ==: —_—
—
{( 20) Pre many favlts, but boaſting is not one; If any thing deſerving praiſe Pve done, Pm not much pleas'd to hear-itoft proclaim'd $ ©, -- But yet, methinks, I'mloath to be defar'd. in! 7 Val. A. Oh! my good Lord, Pre inthis Veſſel found Excellent Metal, tho*it yields no ſound. + 2 He who ſeems here, only an Image dreft, A piece of fine Court-furnitore, at beſt, In Wat is more-then Man, - © wet An. M. So Þ've beentold.. Val. A. I've ſeen Barbarians\numerous, and bold,:. Fly from this Man, -like- Locuſty from a ſtorm ;-.- Wonders in War, Pvefeen him-oftperform-+ | -, But of rough Caſſie, after a Campaign, | No marks but his ſears and wounds remain, Here all his time on pleaſure he beſtaws ; He riſes late, and riſes. torepoſe-: On a ſbft Conch, where Wine drowns all his care' Or on the ſofter Boſoms. 0? the fair. © Where Amorous dalliance, and:wanton Play, . Is all the-toil in'Which he-waſts the day. - & Caf. Ch. My Lord, I loveall pleaſure-nature yields; .- The joys of wanton Beds, and bloody Fields, Perhaps your taſte and mine may not agree ; Whilſt I have Life, I woutd. ſhake all the Tree : I'd have Wine and Women, Muſick and Renown, -: ' And thus have all my days go ſweetly down - -. 1 wou'd not let one moment run to.waRt, - No, nor gooff, with an unpleaſant taſte, - Fearfull and melancholy minds >prepare For their laſt hours by Sactifice iſ Pray't, Contemplate bones and ſculls; But 1 defign: : . To part with life, over a Glaſs o' Wine: PIk fl my Eyes with beauty, .c're they-cloſe, - And Songs ſhall lull me to my long repoſe. Val. A. But whilſt:-your time you eagerly beſtoiy :;: On the warm ſide of life, where'pleaſures grow: Men think you not the gallant Man you are, That all your Manhood lies among the fair. | An. M. So, Cefar-thinks, and tramples on his brow, ._.. But Caſſius does not ſeem to feel the blow; | But he is to admiration-calm-and tame ; And all his anger is a lambenti/flame. Caſ. Ch.'Oh ! no, my Lord, .I-feel the heavy blows, -:. Nar have I all. the patience you ſuppoſe;. - jv v
5”
- (a4 J
Tis true, I keep my painful Wounds unſeen ;
But wounds,” when inwardly they bleed gangreen.
Reaſons there are, why.1 ſeem patient now ;
But I, one day, may let the Emperor know.
E love not to oppreſs, or be oppreſs'd; -.
But every thing is in its ſeaſon beſt; -
Man has his hours of ſleep, when he's embalm'd
With that ſoff unguent, and liesall be calm'd ;
Trees have their ſeaſons, when you'd think 'em dead,
Bnt Nature finds a time to lift her head,
And ſhortly Caſſius may his vigor ſhew,
And make the World ring, with a dreadfult blow,
Shall ſettle Regal Diadems 3. whichr now
Totter, on many a trembling Prince's brow ;
But all our bonds write in Imperial gore.
That I'm a Man, and Ceſar is no more,
' An. M. This ſudden lofty flame has mademe ſweat;
Oh! Caſſizs, worthy-of a name ſo great: -
May'ſt thbn in fame and fortune, far exceed
The Renown'd Caſſius, who made Fulius bleed. 'Fal. 4A. Have I not told the Emperor, Pm his Friead,
That Cz/ar, -againſt Ce/ar, PI defend t:
That, to encreaſe his Empire and Renown,
By Wars, which | may honourably own :
PIl-in the face of my danger fly ?
And doſt thou hope I'll give my ſelf the lie.
Let Ceſars Life be ſtoln by baſe-ſurprize,
And own my ſelf. a Villain in diſguiſe ?
On Faith and Honour I have fixt:my foot ; _-
And for that ground with Ceſar Pll diſpute.
Perhaps his favour, nothing can retain,
In my own favour I'll to death remain,
Caf. Ch. Does not your Lordſhipevery moment ſhed *
Blood, guiltleſs blood; 'by guarding Ce/ar's head, Val. A. He's young and fiery ; and has a Brain
Deſeas'd by drugs, and Knaves the dregs of Men.
All the corruptions of a Land repzir
To Courts, and, fill *em with unwholeſome air :
A Monarch with great vertue is endy'd,
If he appears but moderately good ?
Caſſins your wrongs are not to me unkuown,
Nor that all Nations under Ceſar grown.
But I'll to him, and all mankindbe juſt,
Prote' his Perſon and oppoſe his Luſt.
Pl} + - 5y Counſel firſt to ſtop hiscourſe ;
T4 *-' ng, Pll to fair and open force, -
of
| (. 22.) ' Is. Cejar's taplts, or yours, Pll have no ſhare ;* {q1p4b3 to an Off '#'of . Secure this 1 ribune; Sr, avith.utmolt care. wheGuartsr nv; 11,54 An Offcer, with a Guard; ry of: C affius Cher #4 A Prijes | An. 21. My Lord, a noble ſpirit you diſplay”; ” , | . But yet, my Lord ; this 1 moſt hotdly fav * 7 0 | f You feel not Ce/ar's : faults, as thanſands-do ; Adeccent diſtance they have _ fron-you. "They have not yet approach ypurheart or heads Nor __ yane fortune,: or wc your: Bed. -
'Va. A. My Bed ! © An. AM. Your Bed, as mipets oft has done; (Flis brutal Luſt, basoftmy Bed o Te run. On remote fires, with ſmall concern we gaze; Bur we all riſe when onr own dwellingsblaze. Had Ceſar and your Wife. been kind 96:59; "60
Yal. A. Been kind. MNo more, I {ſweat when e'er their names are Joyntd;
/n. M. You wiſely kcep-her our of Caſar' s. ſight; And in ſafe privecies etxgraf& delight : 'Yon never ſuffer her.toſke the Town, Ard thus ſecure her honour and your own.
Jal. A My Lord, 1'd ſtabher, if ſhe ſhou'd preſame But to look towards, or.own ſhe dreamt of Ron:e ? Damnation ! She's in Court; in. this Lewd Court : I pray, my Lord, foryour own fake retire, Of my Domeſtick troublestake no- ſhare; You have enow, and more than! you-can bare
(Exit. An. M. Enter Julia, attended.”
Why, how now, Madam,”am 1 difobey'd ? | What has allur'd you, from your Sacred ſhade To Rome, where ev Ty Vice'has open ſway ; | & Revells and Rages, in fight of day ? | ;
Fu!, My Lord, Por overjoy'd awith your Renown: Spoil not my pleaſure with an angry frown. Why do you look with ſuch a threatning brow ? My Lord, you arenot ina battle-now,
F:!. A, Pm in worſe danger, as I've cauſe to fear ;
For you expoſe my life, and honour here. . If ere you come in ravenous Ceſar's eye, Your beauty 1] be devoured, and [ fhall die.
Jl, I guard my ſelf”:
V.zl. A. F'I1 not truſt your't aſs Pl hurry you a hundred Leagzes from hence. Your Beauty ſhall not flouriſh in report ; Hl farle that banner. up, remote from Court.
(23)
- Shell I diſplay your tempting white and red, - And challenge Ce/awto invade” my Bed ;
Provoke the proud Adulterer to-my"Couch,
And be Procurer tomy own Reproach ? |
Jul. You have confin'd me, till I wiſhed to die;
Th unborn- have as much joy-in life, as I,
* Yal. A. Ceſar and you I lebour'd todivide; .- But, ſhame and ruin, what have Ideny'd ?
I out of love, confind you to a ſeat, . .
1do not think Elezijum is ſo ſweet. |
I kept you a Luxurious Court at home ;z
You had the pomp, without the crimes o' Rome. Had Reaſon Rul'd you, I had pleas'd your mind, + Bur Reaſon 1s oe yore of womankind. _ Your Luſts and Vanities no bounds admit, - You're moderate in nothing but your Wit.
J:l, This pi&ture of our Sex, not much allures;
Now Þ11 endeayour to delineate yours, Our Follies are akin, but yoursare groſs, And ours from beauty have a pleaſing gloſs: Your Fop is but our Ape, he paints the face, And aQs our fool without her Charming Grace: Both Sexes vex the World with noiſe, and prate ; But we confound a ſtreet, and you'a ſtate, Our fools but ſeldom write ; your Sex is ſtor'd With fools, who will-be Coxcombs on Record, And their impertinence through ages « yorY 4 Your ſcolds in Books wrangle alive, and dead. Fighting all Women, and moſt Men, abhor ; But Women Cowards have wit to keep from War, Your mighty Tyrant Lords our beauty rules; Your greateſt Wits are gulVd by Female Fools, P've youth, I've youth, and pleaſure I'll enjoy, But fear me not, my birth and ſpirit are high, Rather than taint my Family I'd die,” |
Yal. A. Of Ceſar's wickedneſs Fm moſt irr fear, Madam, begone, you're in a mad houſe here ; Not where a Lunitick is held in Chains, But wherea great Imperial -Madman Reigns. Who tares the Werld and lays all Nations bare, And when he has enjoy d he ſtrips the Fair : Of his Lewd love thoſe are Triumphal ſhews, + . In jovial moodes on Favy'rites he beſtows, The beanteous Empreſs I have oft by night Beheld allnaked, like unclouded ]ight,
Hay
24 J A - Have often ſeen In wariton paſtares-ſpiead, - That r4zen beauty on a Golden bed. : | , Ji, VWtever you ſyppoſe, e're Pd Le.faad -
ns FER op ad. : TY ” $* = a=
To bratal Luſt, Lyons Thoy/4drink wy blood, Agee, Val. 4. Oh! Madam, you.have vertuesthathe ſlights, And Rapcs and Rapines, arc his high dcjights, ,
He loves to make all Nature feel his force ;
Rivers he Raviſhes, and Turis rheir courſe ?.
* He levels Mountains, -Elevates the Vales;
O're waves he rides, and over Lands he fails.
Nay, he builds lofty Palaces' on Seas ;_
He ſcorns the Pleaſure he can galn xith eaſe : have bee h>t ; but no oneſhou'd admire
In a.watch Tower to ſee a bla. ing fre.
*Tis kindled vp, to lend a needful light
To \'ariners, in dangerpus dead of night: To tell *em Land is year, they're caſt away,
+ Unleſs they keep aloofe to Sea, *till day:
For-ſuch kind ends my paſſion flam'd aloft, | But though my words were harth, my heart is ſoft. Now III no more be troubleſomely wiſe. z | F
- Dwell where thou wilt, with thy own heart adviſe,
Study thy pleaſures and regard not mine ; To my own boſome, 1H my fears confine.
-But of my fortunes carve thy ſelf thy ſhare,
I will lock nothing from thee, but my care. | Zul. This gen'rous Love I never can requite ; In pleaſing you, FI place my chief. delight ?
- Rome from this moment I renounce,  abjure,
Fl not the memory of Foe endure. Nay, in my preſence, no one ſhall preſume To mention infamons and vitious. Rome.
Val. A. Oh! if this Town ſhou'd rightly be pourtray'd,” . Hell muſt lend colours, fur a diſmal ſhade. FRE Climates there are, which burn the natives black,
And ſcorching day appears a fiery Lake. In a more horrid Climate here we dwell, For they are burnt by Heaven, but we by Hell: -
- Here boſoms oft flame with inceſtnous fires,
And many Sons are Brethren to their Sires, Our Emp'ror has with high-ſprung Baſtards ſtor'd A thouſand beds, ard all hisSiſters Whor'd. Tl, Oh ' Monſter!' * © | Val. A. Stay : He drags thee to his bed, Az4 then his fear and envy take my head;
B68 =. #
"None whom he fears, will-he with life entrylt, And nothing that he likes eſcapes his Luft.
Jul. My Chariot ;— I abhor a Court {o Lewd : Methinks it has a ſcent of Luſt and Blood, And I ſhall ſicken, If I'longer ſtay ; . - Therefore this yery minute Pllaway.
Val. A. Canſt thou not breath in the ame air with Vice? Then thou muſt quit the World ; tart over nice, Well, I'll releaſe thee from this dire abode, When I've an hour on ſome affairs beſtow'd. Then I'll along ; F hurry thee from hence, Only to ſave thee from lewd violence, Not part with beauty I highly prize, But to ſecure thee to my Arms and Eyes. , LEx.
The SCENE a magnificent part of the Palace, Enter Caligula, Ceſonia, Vitellius, Attendants, Guards,
Cal. I have been building, Madam, fince we went, Ceſ. A palace lofty as the firmament. The Rooms with wondrous pleaſure I behoid, Cal, And mark the doors ; the hinges are of gold. Ceſ. If Artiſts, Sir, can for the work be found, I'd have the doors yield an harmonious ſound, ' As all the Heavens do, when e'r they moye ; And make this palace like the ſeat of Fore. ' Wov'd this were poſſible to human kill. Cal. What is impoſſible to Ceſar's WH. Vit. No, Ce/ar's genius exalts ev'ry mind, Gives a great Soul to Arts of ev'ry kind. Cal. How do thoſe Gardens in thy eye _ ? Ceſ, The face of Winter now frowns ev*ry where, Vit. Oh! Madam ! you're the favorite of a God, And charm'd all nature, when you came abroad ;. The rugged Winter civilly withdrew, And the ſweet Spring look'd out to gaze on you. The Zephyrs plaid, and threw the clonds away, As dancers ftrip, to be more light and gay. Ceſ. 1 wou'd enrich theſe-Gardens, were they mine, With Rocks of Diamonds, and Seas of Wine. Here tydes of Wine ſhou'd daily ebb and flow ; The Walks with golden duſt, and pearls, Id ſtrow, And then I might ſuppoſe, on Stars I trod, As it becorfies the conſort of a God. + Cal. Thou ſhalt have all the Wealth that Nature yields ; Theſe Gardens ſhall excel the _— Fields, |
Or
" 26 . ' Of the Heſperien Groves, ſo'fam'd-of Old, —_ Where all the Tyees bore fruit of ſolidGold. - And will that pleaſe thee? OhA4 how fits the Wind ? This golden Grove brings Afrack to my mind, With much impatience, [ expe& from thence An Obelisk of great magnificence. A Wonder both for ſtature and.extent ; Pye for this Wonder, a Sea Wander ſent, A Ship, which covers-half the Sea, and more, And with its burden makes the billows roar. Vit. Sir, if the Ocean can the burden. bear, ' ?PTwill very ſoon be here, the'Winds are fair. Cal. T hey ſay, that Pyramids-are Regal Tombs. Of mighty Kings; the laſt Retiring-Rooms, This fpacious Univerſe, in War o'ercome, And laid in Ruins, ſhall be Caſar's Tomb. '  Ceſ. Be Ceſar's Tomb ? Let me not ſee the hour When he is entomb'd. | ” . Cal. We will name: Tombs no more. | Ceſ. Their powers to-me, wou'd Deftinies relign,, Eternal ſhou'd be Ceſars Life, and mine, | And all our days be ſmiling, and-ferene ; , We wou'd not know what cares, or troubles-mean.. Cal. We'l may we love, Fm ſure our fouls agree ;. Then may thy life be all ferenity. . And that of pleaſure thou may'(t have thy-fill, Command all Ceſar's power, all humane skill, Now, Love, prepare for Ceſar's golden Couch ;;. Th Images ſmile, 'with hopes of thy approach. They blaze with gold, we burn with hot deſire ; There we ſhall all appear, nay be © fire, |
Cef. Is the Bed new ? For 1, when Pve my Choice,.
| Fet nothng, but my Ce/ar, touch me twice.
Cal. It 1s all new, and fo I think art thou ;
Thou never didſt appear fo fair as now.
Cef. Perhaps from joy, ſome colour I derive .
But I have drooping beauties I'd revive.
By this days tronble, I've contracted ſoil ;_
Therefore, with Ceſar's leave,. I'd bath awhile..
From water then, 111 like a Yezws riſe,
And in my Ceſar's arms diflolve in joys. | Cal. Water a Bath for beauty & Divine & Ceſ. Water ennobÞ'd with the richeſt Wine, .
Perfumes, and peayys difſoly'd. 43:
Cal. Go bath an hour :;
In pleaſure then diſſolve ag Emperor.. | LEx.CeC. and Ladies.
Mp3 ; Enter | 'How now, old id Knight ? thy days declne, But thou reſoly'ſt toemmake thy evening ſhine ; But all the luſtre of thy Youth, and Age, Has been from Buildings, Train, and Equipage. How dar*{t thon have th' ill manners, to abſtain . From War, and Honour, in a Warlike reign ? Paſ, In Youth 1 ſerv'd in War ;, Sir, now Fm old, The relick of a Man. Cal. But wrapp'd in gold. Well, what's your bus'neſs here ? Th $ Paſ. With Ceſar's leave, - From Ceſar's glory pleaſure ts receive. Alſo to let my gracious Emp'ror know + News, which perhaps ſome pleaſure may beſtow; TY jan Wonder 1s arriv'd at laſt, Cal. I Obelisk? Where? Paſ. *Tis of a ſizeſovaſt, » That, Sir, it will let nothing elſe appear ; And, I may ſay, *tis almoſt evrywhere, Sir, I believe, no Province is fo large As the great Ship that brought this monſtrous charge. I was of late forc'd, on a ſmall deſign, To ſend to eAFyype a young Son o mine ; And in this Ship he found a paſſage home. | Sir, a great Nation might have there found roem.
___ Cal. Vl fee this Veſſel, and its monſtrous freight ; Tll go by Sea, prepare my Gallies ſtraight. _ Where is your Son ?  Paſ. Without, Sir.
Cal. Call him in, : Enter Lepidus.
Thou yenture tothe Sea ? no, rather fure, Thou haſt been'poliſhing thy felf awhile, In a ſweet Bath 'of Milk, and Wine, and Oil, The Sea wov'd frighten one ſd foft as thou, , Unleſs *twas ſmoother than a Ladies brow. Where blew the Wind ? | | Lep. In th Eaſt, where gow it blows, . Cal. You mean thro? Flutes and Trempets, 1 ſuppoſe. z The Ocean was in peace with ev*ry doud ; The Winds were only in Wind-Mufick loud. Th'aſt found at Sea a ſerene milky way, | And to thoſe Waters went'ſt to dance and play, L As Ladies do to Wells, when weather's gay. | Oh ! thou hadſt rather Rome, and all the World, ' $hou'd be confounded, than thy hair uncur'd., E 2 Tho
hs
= Ie es ern = Ire WIS un > EX... = —_ _ pm —_ ng .
(28)
Thou never wou'dſt expoſe to rugged air,
Rings which allure, .and Nets whichcatchthe Fait,”
Lep. Nature, Sir, gave me what I value mgre,
A great deyotion for-my Emperor, *
Sir, in that: Ornament hes al] my Pride,
When Ceſar pleaſes; any thing beſide : |
1 can with infinite delight reſign; | 501
In duty, only 1 deſire to ſhine. .
Cal. Well ſaid ? |
Vit. A nobler Youth I have not ſeen;. | ] love you, Sir, our tempers are akin.
* Cal. The Egyptians highly flam'd with zeal of late,
For Ceſar's Glory, does their heat-abate. |
Lep. Ceſar
Vit. When Ceſar's mention'd by your own, . Or any Tongue, pray, Sir, bow bumbly down;
Lep. Egypt with Gods is plentifully ſtor'd,
But, Divine Ceſar thereis moſt ador'd. (yit. and Lep, bow when Ceſar is now's. -
Vit. Yes, Ceſar makesa-glorious Figure there, | Therefore that Kingdom greatly l revere-;;:
And often tow'rds that point of Heaven I bend; |
W hich Canopys that happy holy Land; (Vit. bows toward Egypt
Lep. The Alexandrian Jews each moment feel > Dreadfull effe&s, Sir, of Feyptian zeal.
Cal. And they ſhall quickly feel my fury too ; | And ſo ſhall ev'ry.diſobedient Jew. | | Their old dead Prieſts and Prophets they prefer .
Above a living, new, young Jupiter ;,.. | Ceſar I mean, Lep. The Egyptian Jew: have ſent, A-noble Apent Learned and Hloquent. His Life is Pious, and his Condu® Sage, . He's call d, by. ſome, the Plazo of the Age.
- Cal. Let's ſee this ſecond Plato —— [Ex, Lep. ant Welcome, Sir ? CEmer Philo-- You are a Learned Philoſopher, Imtold,
Ceſar may well admit of your adreſs, You have to nature intimate acceſs, Fr
And are her Miniſter ; yoy ſhall be heard, .
For that's a Ehara&er deſerves regard. .
She is my BenefaQreſs, I muſt own; .
I had from nature my Imperial Crows. .
Nay, more a Godhead on me.ſhe beſtows; .
Or ſo it-is. my pleaſure to ſuppoſe. |
And who will plunder me of what I love; .
Thunder may cafier: be ſnatch'd from Jeve. -
| (29) -Your Nation ſpoils my Images, will you, Aſavlt my high Imaginations too? Phj. To ſuch high arrpgance who dares aſcend ? Sir, with the Egyprians we only contend : Me We'll not thruſt Ceſar down, among thelow © . Rabble of Gods, to which th* Egyptians bow, A Leek in Egypt is a Heavenly Lord; Cart loads of Gods their 'Gardens can afford. Well not mix Ceſar with their Herds and Flocks, Their Rams and Goats; nor yoke him with an Ox *- Nor joyn him with the Monſters of their Nile ; Nor link him with an Ape, athing moſt vile, All theſe are Gods in the Egyptian Creeds ; And for tefuſing this our Nation bleeds, No Age, no Sex; the Alexandrian ſpare : Our Men they murder, and they force the Fir. Cal. Jove is a Ceſar inthe World above ; Ceſar is in this lower World a Jove. He Thunders oft indeed, and ſo do I, But he keeps always ſafe within his Sky ; And, in my Reign; quits not his lofty ground : He Thunders now ; 1 do not love that found——— Why ſhou'd I ſhake when 1 hear Thunder roar, For I've no fear, | Vit. Antipathy, no more; Lyons are in diſorder, when they hear | A poor Cock crow ; yet Lyons have no fear. Cal. Theſe footiſh qualities in Menand Beaſts, - Are tricks of Nature, and her trifling jeaſts. Now will this writing Knave his Prince defame, And with unmanly Cowardize blaſt my name. Hew him to pieces Lictors ; — hold not yet. How ready blockheadsare to ruin Wit ? | Swine ſhall not root in fuch a noble Bed, Whence fame may ſpring*to me when I'm dead. Fit. What Divine Clemency does Ceſar ſhow ? - What ſay you now ? Is he aGod orno ? : F Cal. My Galleys I will haſten to the Port And ſee the wonders that muſt grace the Court. Vit. A throng of noble Youths the honour craves - To Row you, Sir, and be your Galley-flaves. Cal. Well, let *em Row; they'll Row agaiaſt the ſtream, Men muſt tug hard if they get my eſteem, Ex. Cal: Vit. Artendents, Guards. Enter Lepidus and Salome * Sal. My Father ws Fae devout prayers are heard, Good Angels left their Heaven, to be his Guard.
The-
> ; 1 I @V Fre Tydings of your danger 'reect'd my ear; Ah'! what haye I endeavour'd from-totring fear ? Lep. So much it. woy'& be cruelty: to tel ;
' A thouſandtimes ſhe in deep ſmoonings fell. When ſenſe return'd, grief fail d nat to revive : Ah ! how ſhe mourn'd beciuſe ſhe was alive?
And blam'd-us all, who forc 'd ker ro, terain A miſerable Life, when ybu were lain? That to deprive ker, we upkindly frovye, Of happy Martyrdame for filial love ?. © -. _, Phj. Why wert thou'ſo ama2z'd at this Report? Is danger any News in-Ce/ar's Court ? | Thou knewſt we to a fiery furnance cane, . This raging Prince-is always in a flame.” + Sleep cools not him, diſturb*d by dreaws be burny, _ And when he wakes, his waking dream returns, That hes a God : We pity this Difeaſe,” And worſhip not for Gods, his Images, If th* Images be Gods, we ſhon'd adore The Men that made 'em, they are ſomething more. ”Tis baſe born Godhead, which from Man deſcends, If Ceſar bea Ged, as he pretends, His Godhead in Creation was diſplay*d, -He needs no Image but the World he made. { Well, in. the ſhamefull Alexandrian Rape; Daughter, you had the happineſs to ſcape ; But, in this Court tart in. a:dan'grous pl ace, -N And therefore, always vail thy thoughts and face. Lep. Ay, Madam, here yere in the ſear of fin; Ceſar will force the Fair he cannot win.
. Sal. Oh! you have filPd my heart withchilling fears, To fly from him, Pd ruſh o're Swords and Spears : | The Croaks of Ravens, and the Shreikes ot Owls, All boding ſounds threatning. deparwng Souls,
And to the ſick approaching death-proclaim Are not ſo dreadfull as this Tyrants name. (&x.
A CT TV. SCENE, 4 Room in the Court, Enter Tepidus and Salome. Lep. H !/Madam ! 1-was in a-dreadfull fright ; () Had you appear*d in our young Emperors &ght- Sal. Sir, I have no temptations to allure -
Sa great a Prince, and.thereforo I'm ſecure. 5 | Fo
( 3i ) Leg. Oh ! you're al qualities, can be defir's ;- You are by all, but by your ſelf admird, Yare to a wonder fair, and yet not vain, Your innocence and fame have not a ſtain, Yare humble tho' of high extraQion ſprung ; Devout, and Grave, and Prudent, tho' young. Like all your Fathers works, your worth is high, With great delight perus'd by every eye. Oh ! it kind Heaven wov'd grant my hearts requeſt, This work ſhou'd be immortal like the reſt, : Sal. This Charity I thankfully receive ; But affairs call me hence, 1 take my leave. Lep. Aﬀairs? no, Madam, you are too ſevere ;. Why ſhou'd not you Angek ſometimes appear : But, Angel like, you with the Heavens converſe,. ... And with poor mortals will have no commerce. | Sal. _; you oft talk to me of Love, Lep. I do; And ſhew Rehgion in admiring you. If o're my heart your Vertue had no ſway, Ah! what Celeſtial Law ſhould I obey't* What Revelation ſhou'd not I.diſdain ; What miracle to me not. ſhew'd in vain. ; Sal. Fill joyn'd in faith, onr hearts, Sir, muſt not joya ;- Our Laws, which many wonders prove Divine, ; From Forreign Love ſtriftly encloſe our races _. | Shov'd I climb o're thoſe Walls to your embrace, And boldly lay all piety afide, You wov'd not, Sir, accept me for your Bride, For to Religion ſhou'd I prove untrue, You cou'd not hopel wou'd keep faith with you. I fin if to your Love I lend an ear, T Therefore, in grnerena Charity ity forbear. Lep. Oh ! *tis the nature of a flame to rove, My eyes will in your preſence talk of Love.
My heavy ſighs will ſilently i
And own my ſecret languiſhings '7 Sal. Oh ! Pm afraid you own your love elſewhere; * And it will reach your angry Emperors ear. Have you confeſt your Love to none. Lep. 1 have ; Ttalk ſo much of Love, Men think I rave. I mention not your name ; but fair and young. Lovely, and Love, dwell always on my Tongue And ke ſerve me for every reply. | 4 Some-azk>where Ceſar is—n Love ſay L.-
Some”.
—
oh SW -Some-azk what new-74isd Forces we prepare, Aealnſt the fpring ;— 1 anſwer, young and fair, - Some, if the Towns, that Ceſar took, were ſtrong-z L anſwer, wond'rous beautiful and young. Sal. Oh! Sir! avoid me, | leaft 1 ſhou'd be won, And then you ſhare our fate, andbe-yndone. To Ceſar's Image we'll-not humbly” fall ; And now his fury flames around us all, A horror ſits og.ev'ry Jewiſh brow ; - Our Nation has a frighttul aſpect now. ' Sir, for my peace, give your Addreſſes or, And'for your ſafety never ſee me'more. -- Lep. Ah ! crugl-doom ! and notto be obey'd Who can live always in a monrnful ſhade ? Well, tho' your Laws, and you, all hope deny, Sweet Maid ! I muſt Jove on. -----— | Sal. Ah! ſo muſt I. @ © 2-4 'F Aſrae, Sir, pray retire, I ſee my ry 4 near ; | He'll be diſpleas'd if he ſhou'd find you here. n . Since yon coma! maſt, and will withdraw; ;But I hope yet, in your dividing Law, To find a paflage, where our hearts may meet, And have delights, as innocent, as ſweet. - [Ex.'Lep. Sal. at ſe- Enter: Caligula, Attendants, Guards. veral doors, Cal. 1 went for a dead tniracle of Arrt, And a fair living Wonder charm'd my heart ; A Divine beaiity ! ſhe exceeds all praiſe : | ] ſent Yitelie for her, and he ſtays. | How dares he let my pleaſure be delay'd ? * He knows Pm not of patient metal made. 4 6 Tis dangerous my appetites to-pall, - 2m Or make'em await a minute, when they call. eat Fae Enter Conſuls,' and Senators, | What wouv'd you, have'? - 4 nn, x Conf. of nie pleas't to ſend” 29: "0,5 SÞ -His Orders to us, that we ſhou'd attend. P90 CVE Cal. My Lords, you are.all deep in Cs/ar's debt, For Ceſars Wars ; and crimes you oft commit. '2 Conf. Into Court-myſteries we dare not pry -
Ceſar's Commands are wris (we know not why
In CharaQters, which can be read by none ;
So into faults we fall, to us unknown.
\ __ Cal. Youſay myc cannot be read ; : Our Roman Prieſts, and Lawyers, earn their Bread By turning Laws, and Jupiter's Commands,
To myltick ſtuff, no mortal underſtands.
mY
F —_
( 4 d) ” <3: # . Thus they deceive you, yet nerTepines;: ** You-are their fools, why.ſhou'd you' net b 2 Conf: Sio, when your Will: you' tegibly expreſs, Weto our duty readily'addreſy”' | Cal. No; for my Wars, "when 1 exa& my due, ; No ſtreams are louder murmucers than-you; The World is all my own, *tis alt-Crown-Land : I reign from Heav*n to Hell 3 — perhaps beyoad. You live on the Eſtates I'm pleagd to lend, * Yet you'd have me upon your Alms' depend. You are the Coalals. 1 Con. Yes, great Sir, we are, Cal. Thoſe Offices'you ſhall no longer bear - I'll chuſe a Conf.;1, that has Youth and Force, ws Spirit and Fire ; I'll chufe my.fav'rite Horſe. are ruld by Brutes, who are not half ſo wiſe ; How often Fools to Magiſtracy riſe ? | Elephants carry Caſtles in the Eaſt ;,_ Here Tow'rs and Towns often ſapport a-Beaft, Yowll honour, only for his noble: breed, * A Blockhead, and why not a noble Steed 7? Our Roman Prieſts rule ey'ry Soul and Purſe, Yet they've no more Religion than my Horſe. Begone / begone ! the charming beaury*s-won ; Throuzh all my-veins enlivening; pleaſures run, CEx. Conf. The news ! the news ! Sen. and enter Lucius, Virellias. Vit. Sir, ere ſhe was aware, | We ſnatch'd her up, and forc'd her to a Chair ; C And thea ſhe ſhriek*d, and tore her beautious hair. Cal. I would loſe nothing of her; *t:s confeſt, Except her hair ; thou haſt brought all the reſt. Vir. Yes, Sir. | Cal. Go, bring her. [Eater Julia, forc'd by a Guard 7ul. Pm in Ce/ar's pow'r'; 1 came to Rome in-a dark fatal hour, - Oh! Ceſar! [She bneels. Cal. Goddeſs /— io no doubt you are ; No mortal can beſo divinely fair. Nay,.\nay; \at-my requelit, ſweet Madam, riſe :; Letall your Graces entertain my eyes : To Ceſar grant the infinite” delight To touch; and ſee a'hand ſo ſoft and white. Were ber — of ok | This hand might =x77 on my heart, , Where have you liy'd ?.- v7
Jul. In Woods remote from: hence ;- | | And, till this hour, in peacefulinnacence. ot 1191.91 Cal. In Woods? there werei noſhades, whilſt you ſhone there : Why wou'd you not at Ceſer's Court appear,” 30 0 - - © But hide, in a remote and Jonely Grove, | | ' f he only perfet Workmanſhip: of Jouve? 7 I faw you walk by T3bar, all alane,. - -* = In a fair Garden, bord'ring on.-my-own ; And in amazing rapture, and tranſport, I ſent this Lord to bring-you to.my Court. Jul. Sir, I am married to a valiant Lord Who has ſerv'd Ce/ar nobly with his Sword, 12 36927 Cal. He loves thee-not. ; elſe: he wou'&loverto ſhew The happineſs in thee his Stars. beſtow : } For all Mankind are oftentatious;; yain:;, And pleaſures, when expos'd,. moſt entertain. Men think their fortunes droop;zwhen: they?re-conceatd, ; And-pteaſure ſweeteſt, when ris air'd-reveal'd;.| \ And oi my Empire too, he:hav poſſe: - A part, .I value above all the,reſt;-; | By Yenus, I wou'd Tather quit-my, Throne, __, > ; Madam, I may. and will affume:my: own. :- Jul. A thouſand painful deaths I'll rather che; Cal. 1 die a painful death-if:you. ;refuſe. Madam, my Time, nay more, . my Life you waſte ; Yes, Madam, now 'tis Treaſon-to_ be chaſte, ..' Jul. Sir, for the World I'd not my Henour- loſe. Cal. Oh ! I'm the Fountain whenceallHonour flows; | Yes, Madam ; ſure you are-not to be told, (f Men honour nothing more than Pow'r;, and Gold; ; I can make Vertue ſcorn'd,/ and Vice eſteery'd ; I can make Hell ador*d; and Heav'n blaſphem'd. Succeſs, Dominion, and'the-longeſt Sword, ; | Makeany Creeds beliey'd, or Gods ador'd; | Jul. Oh! fave me / ſave me! all yon Pow'rs above ! Cal. I will hear nothing, from that voice; but loye. Jul. Aſſiſt me, gracious Gods / without delay ! Cal. Does ſhe _ noiſe ? then let: my muſick play: . [ Cal. forces her out ; ſhe. flaricks, and> tbe; Muſick P "of © | Vit. "> Emer men Sugs aye ptr in a glaſs. Ce. This Bath has fleans'&:my blood, and made it thin; Has reviv'd all the Lillies in my $kin; þ The Roſes in my cheeks, withſuch-a red- The-bluſhing morning leaves her watry Bed.-
| Thus-
( 35.)
This way my Ce/ar went, as Pm inform'd—o - The dooris ſhut-the Caſtle muſt be Rorm'd, (She knocks, Vit.
Vit. Who's there ? —— . ©. - «nſwers within, Ceſ. Your Empreſs. "oP Enter Vitellius. 1 look wondrous well. : [She looks in the Glaſs,
Now all my Sex, nay, I my ſelf excel]: - Freſh Roſes in my\ Cheeks now ſweetly blow. Your Emp*ror went this way not long ago. Vit. Over that. Beauty ? Yes, | muſt confeſs, That has been long his, only Paradiſe. There his heart liv'd, there his Lips often ſtray'd ; But Czſar now 'is by new Beauty ſway'd. (Aſide, Madam, your pleaſure with your humble flave ? Ceſ. Yve bulineſs -- —— Yit. With your Glaſs ; I ſee you have, Well, we have now three Empreſſes in Town ; This beauteous Empreſs here, whoſe falling Crown, Unknown to her, lits looſely on her head ; One Empreſs in a Glaſs, and one i” Bed. (Aſide. Ceſ. 1 think I never look ſo clear and fair ; TN ſteal on Ceſar, like a fhape of air. Vie. Moſt Sacred Madam, Ce/ar now retires For great affairs, and privacy deſires. Ceſ. From me? Vit. From all the World, for half an hour. Ceſ. Dare you oppoſe me ? then I've loſt my power ; And ſome new beauty over Ce/ar Reigns : My blood will ſtart out of my ſwelling Veins, Vit. Ceſar indeed, tog often to his coſt, Injures himſelf and you ; himſelf the moſt - , And your misfortune you have rightly gueſt. Ceſ. My heart can neyer have a moments reſt, | Why do I loyter whilſt my intreſts bleed ? (She offers to po, Ha! ſtop me : Youare a bold bawd indeed (and he reidhes v, Wert thou a flaming Mountain 1'd not ſtay, But thro' thy burning bowels force my way. Enter Caligula. . Cal. How now ? from whence is this preſumptious noiſe Who dares break in on Ceſar's Privacies ? as Love is the offender, Sir ; Eove urg'd me on To ſtay your heart, e're *tis for ever gone. For 1 am told, my Intereſts decline ; You have found Beauty that charms more than mine. Cal. Come, yare Luxurious, Haughty, Vain; Ca/ar you love, becauſe you loye to _ p 2 Ce/.
-
etna Gil never with-more 14ove to-matineſs, and as madly movnrn.”
(.36-)
Ceſ. Ceſar 1 love more than his Glorious Crown ;. _ . And | loveCeſar let wy nodeog 25:01: Wo, My ry burn :-
Cal. Oh ! you aremad no doubt; for who is not ?* Cowards are mad, they fexrtheyknow not what... .- What death is'to the living ne're. was ſhewn :z © Life is not more to the unborn naknown. | The brave are mad, for fam# they*1l-madly die, W bich after death they hope'nor to enjoy.” _ A oars-atgs, The Learn'dare mad, and madly tear their brains; "7 Fer knowledge ; which no mortal e're attains. |
. And whatcoatuſion from Learn'd madneſs ſprings,
Among eligions, Laws, States, Realms,” and Rings? poeye> And yet in Schools, where thoughtfall madneſs Reigns: | The mad are free, and Booksare bound in Chains :
The Vitious are ail mad, by Laws confin'd :
The Vertuous are more mad, - themſelves they bind :>
And Jave was mad, when hemade mad Mankind.
' 1] here's one great flaw:runs through the Earth and Sky;
And ev'ry-God and Man is mad, but 1. |
Ceſ. Wou'd I were mad; I ſhou'd be more at caſe, And have no ſenſe of all my- Miſeries. New Beauties vanquiſh Ceſar ev*ry hour ; Then how does raging grief-my heart devour ? My heart to Ceſar fixt,- more torment feels, _ - Than if he dragg'd me at his Chariot wheels.
Cal, ] love, and hunt variety; tis true: - And does not Mother gature-love it'too ? Good Gods ! how does-ſhe vary humane mold ? - She often makes new faces ©' the Old.. If 2ny have in Life-continued long,” We always ſay they're Old. we do*em wrong ; - And if we call'd *em'Young, *tis but their due,” Their-Shapes and Features are-entirely new. How oft does nature change us-e're we die 7” She loves new faces, then why ſhou'd not l ? In chace of change my: Nature loves to gun,: Yet to amazement I have dofed on. Two years and more, I have thy will obey'd ; —_— _ ſeem ” A pen | | | They've ſprung'to Ceſar's - young; lovely, gay ;- AndI have thanghe 'em-old by break & day, waa Haye thought 'em dead with age : and I've decreed « To burn *em oriembowel em with ſpeed. a
: (#7 )
But to thy arms I've been two years cdnfia'd; ; Th'art an.EnchantteGDanflcanſt fix the-wing, Back to its ſpring canſt-make.a torrent vun, - 27 + And ſtop the hery/Chariot the Son;'* Sf The Beauty only cou'd not haye-the Power” To fix my heart: neverſeeiCe/ar more. IC
Ceſ. Oh! theſe eternal Tempeſts who can beak # Flrather fink into-profound deſpair.  -* I'm hourly broken.on a golden ſhore; A barren-beach cowd not-afflict me more.: I never in your preſencewill appear g*+> 20 | - [111 Labour to forget you ever were, 090 1 No Image of you ſhall my griefs'renew -/: Hal And ſo a long farewell to. Loveand you! +s : 17109" 5.5.9)
Cal. Come back ? T
Ceſ. Only to loye, and mourn in And bea follower, 4d nlerur Lond
Cal. Tl havethee wrack'd, /tpimake thee owntheart; |
W hich thus eternally enſlaves myheare:! When any one but thee Pre oft embrace”
Corrupted Water hay/kiſaveeter taſt, Mw 7 1.5 11 rea v0
But thee I never can abandon lo
Thy pane ap Beauty, and tochabting; Tengue,' Soon make the wandring Gods of Love return; And now once more with violence { burn: 4
QF. Oh / Ceſar, Ceſar TRY IT no mote: : 2 ' 91 yy:
For can I moderately Love, - Adore |
A Prince ſo Great, - ſo Grat Li Divine! 97.3 OV Ah ! what do I enjoy whilſt Cefer's mine? | And when I looſe his heart; does he believe That Iean calmly; moderately grieve? .
Cal. ] know in Love my Godbead t exert, Therefore.'m loy'd by thy voluptuous hearr..
Caſt from thy mind alljealouke-and fear;
111 ne're forſake thee, by my Life Iſear.
Ceſ. Your heart no beauty ſcarce an hour cotures: To
I could dwell years apon a kiſs o'-yaurs,
Cal. Thou art a Golden Harp Drvinely.tun'd,, _ What Statue wou'd not dance to ſuch a ſound ? Raſe from thy memory my ſinfull hours, And all my little vagabond amours ;, They're __ and like other vagrants poor; Soon waſt their hres, and then appear no more; Others no more the riots can ſupply Of ſuch an Epicxre in Love as I ;
—Then's Peids fortuieramdoppart £3 Mt 02 0
- The livelier ſenſe of his 0's
' Exceſs o'recomes, but
-
My Guards, my Fleet, my-Armies, antony Court: va
- But my- excurſions from thy; erms improve. 0:
Thy.joys and mine, and res
ions.” So an Arabian gains-by ig > V3
zon' {us Ceſ. Coſt whajgwill, eſti I fly, i I cannot pay too dear for ſo much joy. ' (She raps 1oCiſar's cembratits - Cal. Oh! Welc:me to my armsmy- Charming Love? . Cef. Welcome to mine,zymy: young cm 0s a piog | Oh ! my exceſs of Love gluty Cafgris heat};
- If 1 were wiſeId temp'rate noaiarpay 4
But Lam too immoderately4ind:;- + v7 Ne no 10 67 Gal: Havel a temp'rate agd a-modrate hind ? 118 Is Ceſar to thy heart no better known? , bi Give me extravagant delights or nane. pr tener is but awkingidredm: Andof all ({vthedfupreme.:1 2 And therefore Love immodesdte:Love deſerves: 4
I'm in my Empreſſes ominion ſtil. | Lef. And tho* he wanders, 1 love ©ale fil. Ceſar | methinks Sovenedd Cole: _ I love,/ the thoone __ = oy e in my QWR-cnbroces,: .confes: And 1 will Love to infinite exceſs. 4 - Cal. Love toexceſs,. 'th/art infinitely fair, In my delights I can no limits: bear.. But (for what reaſon never eov'dhe known)
Fear not my wandri z for gawhere1 will, 4945 \ ;
, Our joys have bounds, and-our-fcfires have none, | ($+.Cal, Cef. #-
tendants, Guards, Vateries Aſiaticns, p
Frey
Val. A. Oh ! I have wet with'News,"which wakesme flame; And every FF upbraids me with my ſhame. - My ſervices have met a kind-teward :* The hour I quittetl my-Domeſtick Guard, The Emperors Bawds ravifh'd my Wife away ; "Ys And he's devouring/now _ Luſcious prey. She comes —— ©
\ Exeer Jelia, Oh ! 7ulia ! what has Ceſar done? Jul. Oh! my Lord 1 leave me ts my gricks alane. Do not look on me, I'm a hatefull ſight, And long to hide in everlaſting night. As in my Garden I walk'd all alone, 907 "II as] thought, unſeen, unknown, |
(39)
The Emperor, from an Apartment nigh,
' Ofren beheld me with a y eye
7 ' And forc'd me thence, — Let menot tell the reſt , Oh ! thou moſt wrong'd of Men, and. yet the beſt, Val. 4. New Giants have bound Jove,fo he lies ſtill, J -* And lets this filthy Tyrant take his fill - Of Whorecom, Blood, Rapes, Inceſt, what he will: Had Ceſar raviſh'd fron me all my Bottomleſs treefures, nimberleſs commands, * _ But to thy beauty neyer bad approach'd, * h, Had left me thee unblemiſh'd, and untonch'd ;.- - My heart is fo devoted to thy love,” I wou'd not have chang'd happineſs with Jove. Jl. Oh ! my dear Lord, your wrongs with patience bear, Truſt not your dang'rous paſlions = the air. Val. A. Revenge, reve my love I muſt purſye The Tyrant with more caſe I can ſubdue, f:I'5 And fear him not ; for as the lofty Sky, And bright full Moon, attraQt a mad man's eye, This gawdy Tyrant's meditations gaze On the bright ſplendors that around him blaze, And ſo to-others no regard he pays. Like a fierce Panther I wilFhunt my prey, And with his blood waſhall my ſpots away. © Come, let” me lead thee home: TIME ul. _ you endure , M . To touch, or to approach one ſo impure? I hate to Gonch'my lf to draw wibecath It makes me fick ; and I am ſick to death. For Lovel prize, for Love Hoſe my life z. - 1 liy'd your chaſte, ard die'your martyr Wife,” = Val. 4. Oh! Ceſar ! Ceſar\'thon ſhalt feel my Swort; . © Shall is too ſluggiſh, and: too faint a word. The Tyrant's fallen, on-his:Neck T tread ;" He's dying by my Sword ; nay more; hes dead. But can one death for all his crimesatone ? He breaks thy Laws : Oh! Nature'!-break thy-own: ” Let him have many Lives, be often'born, That he may often be in-pieces torn.
-} "x.
L 7
- wa? CO ' » SY
. RS 5 n — wx. To \ > OTIS Woo Gy ny on oo nero Oo —_— —— -
; #5) oO. 4 | ? (48), ag, \ _ : a9! = ne fot 2019GmA $5T
Dr X LY MF S.1 C Fr raithn an8 bioffed ne:
y 6rd m4 -» GENE + 53 903 9 Lo:
Jul, Nunn, m Hort
Enter Valerius Oh ! my dear Lord ! I'fe geo And Death wi!l ſoon tranſpo For tam alt in a conſuining fl: vilany 4-5: 1 burn with popion, " LF uru a ſhame,
Val. A. With ot. tte, 3-8
Ful. Poyſon'; ot I's ve never been. 218 , With a worſe evbrogg nc, nASre A Oh ! I abhor the thought ks
Vl. 4. Pre no diftet gef3 a Joh mid tit ba
Jul. Pve been inviglably tri eto er ano 11:7 weird. | No one can have a Sbul more i Wert Erngny TT vhw From foul deſres ; — . for 'Cf/ hrs te. : I
Val. A. 1 db believe thou art - ' Wound not thy wound.d RR ewe
How much 1 yalue thee chobhaf i ag Wan Becauſe I love thee more than can I, out of love, conceaPd thee ina ſhade. *
Jul. And your Commands ag Niſobey Th -And came to Roe. T9273 | [She kno The fatal fault forgive ; In:
And, at the leaſt, oh ! love me, whilſt Flive, __ : Val A. Ay, and for eyer.;. riſe, ſweet Juha, rig 4/705 5; Riſe to my arms, thou ife. of WJ.J0yS, 1! 4, TAL 4 Bur a departing life my Julie digs, ..; | 3
Ful. Oh! wou'd to Heay 8.1 4, before This ſhameful violatiop, ——.Oh! no.moxe:
My bluſhing checks glow with a fiery red z, 1n thy dear boſom, , let me hide:my. head.
An M. How bleſt was IF ES beayy mrong,.. ich. In a ſoft beauty, conſtant, ch: and JORMMe.: -i o  13n 3 1607 | Jn this ſweet Lady all erfeQions j joyn z FA Wy I never had a pleaſing hour with mine.”
Jul. When | am dead,*ſtrew me all o'er, Ipray,
With flow'rs, to ſlew that | was chaſte as they.
Pal. A." AS ſweet, and Jovely too.
7+l. T hey fade, and die,
-'W hen hey are ruGely. touch's:; and ſo do L
p un F> Y ils X *
" What Il fo lo
_
( 41 ) Oh'! my blood riſes, my cheeks glow again : hy ſhov'd IL bluſh for wicked Ciſas's fin >: | Val. A. The leaſt undecent thought thou canſt not bear ; Thy Vertue, to its ſelf, is too ſevere. Jute Oh.! ſee! the Souls of Veſtal Virgins come, To welcome me, and grace my martyrdom ; They're all inRobes, whiter than mountain Snow. Val. A. Alas! ſhe raves, £5 - Tal. Do you not ſee %em ? Yal. A. No. 7al. Then 1 perceive, the modeſt beauties ſhun The ſight of men ; therefore begone, —begone. I ſhall in triumph to Elizi»mgo ; 'Tis a great honour, Ladies, you beſtow. Oh ! they -retire. Ladies, return again,
-
Admit me into your ſacred ſpotleſs Train.
I'm chaſte as you, tho? not ſo fair in fame ; For wicked Tongues, I know, will wrong my Name, Throw on my mem'ry undeſerv'd diſgrace ; But your ſweet Groves will-hide my bluſhing face. Oh ! they are going, ſtay ſweet Virgins, ſtay; They're gone ! they're gone !- yave-frightned 'em aiyay. And I'm with rangers left I know not where. Val. A..TWart in his arms, to whota th'art wondrous dear, Jul. Ha? you are Caſar. @ Val. A. No, ſweet Julia, no; I'm Ceſar's mortal, and eternal foe. Jul. Well, yare a man, and ev'ry man I] dread. — Who's this ? my Lord ? 1 knew not what I ſaid. In my few moments, that niy thoughts ſhon'd rove From him, whom I ſo dearly, dearly love. Val. A. Lean, lean, my Julia, on my panting breaſt,
My love and ſorrow cannot be expreſsd.
Jul. Fm going where'no wicked Tyrant reigns;
| Preſerve my mem'ry.
Val. A. All thy dear Remains. 7ul. Heav'n knows how I've been faithful to your Bed? I've-loy'd you to my death, ſhall love when dead.
Elizjum can to me no blifcafford, *
Till in thoſe happy ſhades 1 meet my Lord : Till then—farewel, —— [She dies. Val. A. She's going —— ſhe is gone. Ab! ſee, what beaſtial tyranny-has done. Her beauty's gone; Death has deflowr'd her too, Fd I've not the heart to view.
G
-
Cover her face ; forbear 2 while thoſe pale _ Departing beauties, Death too long will veil. |
- I will haye ove cold kiſs before wepart; Kiſſes her: Revenge . Revenge! Oh, hqy it ſwells my heart?
oy
An. M. Bewell prepars : Rome lovesa vitious Prince,
" All the corrupt will riſe in his defence. :
Val, A. Well, if Remetiſes, I-will reiſe-ithigher, For I'll exalt it to the Clouds in fire. : But *tis diſpirited;, and dares not riſe ;, And Ceſar's ſcorn'd- by all the brave and wife,
Ar. M. Proud Tyrarts who-no bounds of law endure:
Are common foes z and neyer areſecure-; ..
Their lofry Thrones they ſeldom long epjoy "Þ
Streif. Lyons all men labour to deſtroy,
Val. A. Oh, tremble Ce/ar ; prodigics appear,.. Which ſay, if- there be Gods, thy. fall is near. Prodigious Vertue in this Beauty one 5 /
Her Cauſe and Juſtice live, tho” ſhe is gone,
Thy own prodigious Crimes th'aſt cayſe to dread ; ..
Vengeance they'll hurle at thy devoted head.
Eclipſes are thought fright{uil pmens too :
This ſad Eclipſe thou may'ſt. withterrar view;
[t threats thy life-—- - View it, ye Gods-forbid ,; .
His frantick Luſt wou'd violate the dead.
Methinks I tallgtoo much in words abound,
And my Revenge evaporates in ſound: . Ar. M., Will you not ſet thegallavt-Caſſix« free ?& Vil. A. And ſteal | by ſtabs, revenge, and-liberty ?.'
My honour in full ſplendor I'll, maintain,
FH by fair War end this inbuman Reign.
This night, for mine, and univerſal good,
The Sun ſhall ct ia blood, Imperial blood, ' (Ex.
SCENE, the Court. Emer Caligula, Vitellius, Garde,
Cal. Beauty I love; but I hate toilfome Rapes ; Fove good Wine, but woy'd not tread the Grapes. The Chaſt are cold, therefore I hate the Chaſt ; Fruites in cold climes have-art infipid-taſt.
Fm told by Oracles my death is nigh.
Vie. Your death *
Cal. mydeath ; all I ſuſpe{ ſhall die. Valerius firſt ſhall periſh by my Sword ; He can'in. battle face his Sovereign Lord.-.
.
Vit, Nay...
16. & Lp "Vit. Nay, he's provok'd, and therefore dangerons grown. Cal. Provok'd by pride to mount th* Imperial Throne. And by Revenge provok'd to take my lite, Becauſe 1 forc'd his fair, young vertuous Wite. Caſſizs Cheraa's honeſt, tho” not bold : Valerius has conan'd him, 1 am told. In the mad Revels of his Rage, no doubt, Yalerixs let ſome dangerous ſecrets out, Which now hed lock up in the dark from me : Bur Fl unravel all the Villainy, Fir. The Jews inforuvd, that if they dare deny - To worſhip Ceſars lmage, they ſhall die ; Bey Audience, Cal. Villains — They wou'd not preſume To ſlight my Will, had they not found in Rome Rebellious ſpirits - and when they appear, A Prince's fall and death are oft too near. Nay, a young komar, 1 reprov'd of late, For being Wanton, Soft, Effeminate, Uſeleſs to Ceſar and to all mankind Except the Fair has fawcily deſign'd To wed a Feweſs, nuts in Ceſar's Conrt : With Ce/ar's anger none ſhall dare to ſport.
>
PI reform Reme, and all ſhall feel my Sword, Whoſe names are written inthis black Record, ( Hepalis ot a '>* Then PH to Egypr, where I'm moſt ador'd, Pocket Book. Bring in the jews. Enter Philo and the Jews. Cal, What wou'd you have ? —— (To Phi. T hoſe carvings there look well (To Vit,
Phi. Permiſſion, Sir Cal. Permiſſion to Rebel ? Phi, We Sacrifice for Ceſar every day. Cal. You Sacrifice for Ce/ar oft, you ſay, But not to Ceſar. How dare you'preſume To give-my honour to I don't know whom ? Phi, Leave to enjoy thoſe rights we humbly crave, Your glorious Anceſtor Anugrſias gave, Cal, What are thoſe rights ?* Phj, They're by long cuſtom known ; And all deriv'd by the 1mperial Throne, The Alexardrians light our lofty Gaim ; And hourly put our dwellings in a flame, Plunder our Treaſures, ſeize on all our Lands, }
And often in our blood embrue their hands. The lives of thouſands—— G 2 Cal.
Ta?
- 622 th Lake tion 96a fir. -” Oh! now my Water-works begin to play. (He runs to the fide of Phi. Audience from Ceſar Water' works can gain'; (the Stage. A bleeding Nation humbly. begs'in vain. Cat: Theſe ſtreams are ſweeter murmurersthan you: Now theſe apartments let's a moment view. (He goes to the Other ſide of the Stage,) See there Gods hs on Clouds, | Vit. Can painting give A life to ſhadows; one would think they live. 4 Ca. Yowve rights deriv'd from the Imperial Throne? (7: Phi. There I'll have Windows of tranſparentStone. '- -  }  (Ty'VRt; Which ſhall the fury of the Sun allay The fiery River of a flaming; day, ' Will throbgh thoſe channels coolly, mildly paſs: Glaſs windows in hot climes are burning-Glaſs Have you a Patent ? -——comelet it be ſeenm—— Ot, Phi. Under the Imperial Seal —— Cal. Of Heaven you mean ;: / ./! : For you are the Almighty' detting choice : Your pray*rs have in Heaven a caſting voice. And all your Rams which at-your Altars dye, Prove batYring Rams, it ſeems and force the- Sky. G9; you are cheated fools or ſawcy cheats : Aud above Ceſar raiſe your vain conceits : A Throw down-the Statues of the World's great Lord, \
Whilſt your Imaginations are ador'd, 1 will put all your Nation to the. Sword.” Vit.. A Glorious Prince / Phji.. We patiently reſign Our ſelves to Heavens Will; Cal. And ſhall to mine. | | You havea Daughter now in Rome, *tis ſaid; Whom a young Roman dares preſume to Wed: - Emer Paſtor. Oh ! Paſtor, you've a Son,. who dares deſign _ _ a fair young enemy of mine. . | never heard this dreadfull News inſhsy, If 71 ander-ſtricken cou'd I tremble more ? Phi. Sir, our unhappy Children I perceive, Have wickedly without their- Pareats area Or knowledge, ſtollen into a Martia I never knew they Leagu'd or Lov'd *t It no now. Cal. 'On this offerce,. Vl1 lay a dreadfull fine ; Which ſhall bepaid, by = Sons blood or mine. (To Paſt;
Secure: *Y
(45)
Secure the old Knight'z and then with fpeed and care;. Search for his Son: Conceal him they that dare. Philoſopher, you'd have your Tribes ſubmit, Not to my Will, but oo aſpiring Wit. Say my pretencesto Celeſtial power, .. NEE Are lofty frolicks of my mind, no more ; Will you preſume to give my __ Law ? PIl be ador'd to keep the World inawe ; Ay, and by you ; it you dare diſobey, | | 4 Your death ſhall be among m ſports today, (Ex. Cal. Vit. Guard. | Phi, We muſt adore him; if he's diſobey'd, ['Paſ. lead out aPriſoner. We dye, for Ceſar's ſport were Nations made By power Celeſtial, infinitely good, ; For Ceſar's Luſt to glory, power, and blood ? ; ner Lepidus. Oh ! Sir ! you've wrong'd me ; cruelly beguil'd Your Friend of his-belogd and only Child. Lep. Indeed I have not, Sir ; I will confeſs, I fought to gain her, but with no ſnccefs. Sir, my addreſſes ſhe wou'd not receive, Or lend an earto 'em, without your leave; . And that 1 ſought not, for I fear'd *twas vain, Tknow your zeal : But, Sir, did ſhe complain ? Phj. 1 heard the News in Court, and not tilt row : l p It has reach'd'Ce/ar$ ears, I know not how. The Emperor no contempt with eaſe endures ; 'Till you appear, your Father he ſecures. Andif from Ceſars fierce Revenge you fly, Your aged Father for your fault will die. (Exit Philo and the Jews, at one door ? .. At another, Enter Salome;)* {ep. Oh ! Lovely Maid ! fordeath I muſt prepare, : My iweet commerce with one ſo wondrous fair, Has fallen, it ſeems, under the envious Eye Of fome Court-whiſperer, and I muſt die, Sal. This dire.event, I always did forebode, And loſt the pleafure which thy Love beſtow'd. I've loy'd thee, tho' my Love I have not ſhown, More than *twas fit a modeſt Maid ſhou'd own. Lep., Oh ! whatdelightfull harmony I hear ? But1 muſt meet the death, which is too near; For angry Ce/ar now-in Court ſecures My tender Father, and he threatens yours. If Iabſcond they both will die; I fear;;. Therefore, to ſave *em-both I muſt appear: Sal. Ah {dreadfull News ! thentlvartenſnar'd indeed, Almighty: Father of the World with ſpeed-
[ * /
CET] | | bs | (46 )- "To this brave pious Tomy ſend ſuccont gown Forthe Religion to Lis F: ſhewn,  [-- w Let not the World ſo great, a treaſtre looſe. ; Bar 4«t ſowe other Angel mrerpoſe.
Lep. Some other Angel ? then thou thin&ftmeone, ) What happineſs | looſe ? I muſt pe gone, | Methinks1 hear my ſuffering Father groan,
Farewell, ſweet Love _ | Sa; Farewell ?'ah ! killing word; He parts from me to xuſh.on Ce/ar's Sword From leving, me my genrous Lover dies. | . Lep. And yet that Love above ny life 1 prize. Ah ! Ceſar comes ? truſt nie ro Heavens defence, But not-thy Beauty to-this-Laitfull Prince.
S.zl. Oh ! 1 had rather be.jn-picces torn
By raging Lyons, or in etz4 burn. (Ex. Sal: Enter, at «another dypr, Caliguia, Vitehhtus, Guard.
Lep. Sir, to redeem my Father, | appear Unforc'd, unfonnd, and come a Voluniicr.
<al. Youlove a Feweſs. / A
Lep. Sir, Ido indeed. | I love her Bcauty, Vertue, nor her Creed.
We may accept good Forreign Coin, tho' there The-lmages of Caſar's Foes appear;
Cal. Were ſhc worth Love, ſhe won'd thy Love deſpiſe ; And rather chooſe a Lover, brave and wiſe :
Whoſe Cheeks are drain'd of all the r blood by wounds, | But his good Sword with noble blood abounds ;
His 1ocks are gone, old time bas cut that Comb,
Byt Faine and Wifdem ſprout up in the room ;
Then a young fool, whoſe brains flow all in hair,
But has no heart, and.a wit bald. and bare.
' Lep. This fromthe moſt Eifeminate Prince alive :
Wirh thy own Luſts and Vices, Cafar ſtrive. (afrde.
Cal. Too many worthleſs Youths now cumber Rom,
Who derive all their honours from the Womb. They bask 1n luſtre, which their birth beſtows, And in the lap of Foxtune dully doſe, :
To leave their floath; - and rake-a noble courſe, The Trumpets ſeem with frequent ſummons hoarſe. The grumbling Drums nrge 'em-to- War in vain ; The Drones have Warlick, glory in diſdain, And-from their "wealth and eaſe nd more'can riſe, Then from their amber tombs poor lifeleſs flies, Begone ; tart an offence to Cefar'seye : - Gotothy Father and prepare to die. |
ſ
(47)
Zep. My felt to death with pleaſure 1 reſign, -
Hoping I ſhall redeem his life with mine. (Ex.Lep. guarded. Cal. Go,let Cherga ſpeedily be bronght. Vit. He's come. Enter Caſſius Cherza, with a Gard.
Cal. A Priſoner, Caſſims ? What's thy fault ?+ © Caſ. Ch. My Lord, Yalerizs, who has been my Friend, Sir, 'twas my great misfortune to offend. Cal. Confeſs the truth, ſave thy own life and mine : From his proud heart ſome dangerous deſign Broke in thy hearing, e're he was aware, Ant! then he lock'd it up from taking air. Caf. Ch. He's cloſe and dark, d believe loyal too ; I love a Virgin in the dark, 'tis.true, Not Treaſon, Sir, with the moſt Jovely face: But Pye not ſeen him ſince his laſt diſgrace, Cal. His nature's viſible enough, he's proud ; He Conrts the Senate, purchaſes the crowd, By their aſſiſtance to aſcend -the Throve 2 Power is the Idol of his heart, "tis known. bm. This night the memory of a Claims : With all Magnificence, and publick games, I fail not to adorn'at, ev*ry year: And I ſhall have a great aſlembly-here. This Evening my Tragedians repreſent Some of thoſe Fables, Prieſts of Hell invent, Ther Xome ſhall be a Hell and flow in blood, A noble Fable for an interInde. * Caſſizs, Tl try the metal of thy Sword, Thou ſhalt have the honour to obey+thy Lord. Caſe. Ceſar makes bloody hangmen of his Guard— We to a noble Office are prefer'd.' When his mind changes (which will be ſoon, For it has more new. faces than the Moon, And influences more this lower World) We, by new hangmen, fhall to Hellbe hurl'd. My reſolutions 1 have tet you know, And you embraCd 'em ; now let's give the blow, For which fick trembling Romein ſecret longs : Let's give her freedom and Revenge her wrongs.” The Tyrant by our aid, Robs, Burns, Devours : Let's put an end to all her guilt and ours, (Afdeto the Guards, Cal. Rome has inborn averfions to a Prince : | And 1am warn'd to ſtand orrmy defence By Oracles and Dreatns — _ ſhans my eyes ; - Fm angry that 1 need ſuch poor ſupplies:
Time ©
(49)
by immortal-aztures may be ſpar'd ; MOSS.
n Bay from, ſhort-life to take a third _
;t: Thanksto the Gody4 in yorder beauteous Bower, bf You flept of late. Cal. How long: ?.: [1 Vit. Almoſt an hour, pet”? | Ten minutes Ss for, Sir, 1 proudly own, I number'd 'em,, and then 1-penn'd em down. ; Whatever Cale: to 2&5-(a-Prince ador'd -: By. half mankind) is worthy of Record. « Cal. Then did I dream; from; Heaven (where © was Crown'd) Jy Tove ſpurn'd me.to theEarth;; nay,- wider the ground. The Earth then yawn'd, and with a frightfull roar. Clagd o'remy head, and I was ſken no more,
- _ Dark Treaſon lurksi 1 Kome, | know not where. 36 A
I'm in diſorder HOPOs will call-it fear, - And fo will impudent rlans £00 z | How do they blacken Kings, they never knew? Of their own vain imaginations proud Into their ſtories ſawcily: they.crowd, : Their own Refleftions, Dreams, and falſe Gonceits : -4 So lie with Kings, in the ſame he wr ought PREM | All Rome but I, now with delight aboyn Let Muſick try, with ſweet-inchaoting ſounds "To calm my ſtormy thoughts,t01ull my care. Moſick charm'd Hell and all the fyries there | LAfrer a ſhort Entertainment of Muſick ahi Dancing ;  *Shriehs and tumultnons noiſes are beard from behind the ' Scenes. * Vit. goes put.
My Guards ! my Guards.
. Re- -enter Vit. 1 | How now ? docs Rome Rebel 2. Vis. One _ Statues ſhook and groe d; then fell; Th aſſembly frightned then, [in/rumults roſe ; And-with blood rain'd from Heav'n the pavement. loves. Cal. For Ceſar danger nature is;in pain: There is more truth in Marble thaniin Men.
The fall of Rome, or Ce/ar's death is near : - ©
I'll have the blood of all Fve cauſe tofear. Go and prepare for, this deſign to/night, And we'll to morrow forrage.in delight. + (Ex. Vit, Caf. Now ourgreat-work nv longer let's retard. Strike when I ſtrike. (Aſide to the Guard,
Sir, 1am on the Guard: | c Fe (Ty the Emperor. Be pleas'd to give the Ward. - - - -
Cal, \
(49) Cal. Stay ! let meſee {4wnnrs or ne of te Priapus ; thar is a fie wordfor thet--  'fCal. Ch, wounds the
Emperor anll the Biind fecomd im. The E Cal. Ha! 1 am murdet'd! mvrder'd 4-by my Gr. uu
Caf. Ch. No, no; a murtſerer idgows his jufbreward:{ - (The Ei
Cal. Pm yet "alive | | T Caſ. Ch. How many lives haſt hes ? - oye q hou haſt a thouſand-if tirart livi all wound Had we not kild thee thouſands lt he :
uſt have dn... By us ; 2s victims to thy ' bloody eu hg” | Loca They cov'd no way, bus by thy: fall wr. A *Tiwas on my-innocence a\cruel.rape r9b1t Death | expe, and I'I- prepare to Ele Wo
Nox by the-Councels of thitoſophy,y. ©! =
I will converſe with beauty more Divine;
And be inſpir*d by Love, and Songs; and Wine.
My felt for _ with pleatare1 Ul compoſe, |
And give my life an ent | C oftarmis heard,
What ſhow'd this mean ? "Nom \Clehingf
Left you be cut in pieces if yau'ſtay, (Ex.:Caf. ad theGuard,
Cal. I am yet liviag, and the Villains fly ;
I ſhall reyenge my death before Edie. (He ations to mile Enter Valerius Aſiaticus,  Annivs Minutianus, and thegr parry drivitig Soldievs befere Tem. Cal riſes and ſtag pers.
al. Min. and their pavby return; "74 Fal. A. Whereisthis Raviſher'of! heauteonus Wives, x Of Virgins, Realms, REG Laws, and Lives? Cal. Valerius ? then m my death "was thy defign. - | I'm butcher d here, by ardly Rogues ©” thine, Pal. 4. Cowards 1Thate, and Cowardly treaſon ſcorn, FIl keep unſtain'd the Lawrds 1 have -WOFn; A brave Revenge I fairly ſought and'wan : I'ye beat thy Guards, and -thoi artleftulone. I've given thy dreadfull power a dangerousblow + Thoa and thy lofty Throne both-ftruggle now.- - | Cal. Pm going /—going: —— whither:: +. who:can tel. Val. A, Whither all Tyrants go ; to burning Hell,
© Cal. Id rather fink-into the Hell 1 dread, -
Than at a Raſcalls foot---thus---lay. my head. (Cal.fals agd dies. Fal. A. So, he is fallen, he who lately/trod
On all mankind, and cad himſelf a
: was mortal to his tft he found,
Andin his HioyInow wallows-on the - Hr | An. M. 7vd all: Rome had but one neck, tis aid,
That at one blow he might/all Rome behead. |
bi H
($5) Val. 4. Ay, but he found too meny-handzan Komngal? - Andhands: "it feos, 106-24 195) + ee 31 A debauch'd vitions Privice doa-afien ind 'Tis very ops: taicorrupt mankind; Y Is *Tis odds, he'by hisown corruptian-dies,. . Mt ,oM :  And.crimes- by:crimes juſtly the Gods chaſtize. For Caſſius ſpeedily ſearch all the Ton, {| ,- ' For-he has. wrong'd my:honour: andhis own. He-wrought, noidpubty; the Villany 1 fear'd.; But'by his death my honour ſhall be-clear'd;
Ceſ. My Ceſar murder'd ! end away—— forbear ;- q Now I've loſt Ceſar, whatthave Leo fear.” _ | Oh ! here's my Ceſar, 1 fo Loay'd;-Ador'd;: Lord of the World, I'mſure Cefonia's Lord, Mangled by Villains, 'here.in blood he lies, In his own bload -—Cee, Caſo, Who garemy eyes, 'Ay,) and:mp/ hearty; ſuch infinite Is now a mournfpl; and xs \FhEWotld td:me 1s'all a defarfinawy 5; For a loſt Ceſar, Godg, atm er nee ": . Revengeall-Princes, by this horrid-depd All throges are ſhaken; and all Princes bleed; . Revenge'two Lovers, hereby Villains orn:;, One murder'd, and I only live to. mourn
a j!
Revenge Reb Gon i png fror mGifer ſprung ».. 235 It cannot wrong ? Now the Trees, > the ek Mey will ſoon...
Decay and wither-—+Qtv! I faint +—-Lfwoun- WOW, oa, Val. A. Help her! Wu Ceſ. Stand off; P've pleaſure.in; my grief -.
Except revenge, 1 defire:no rehef,:;!
Take np the precious relicks of: yourPrince :-
Oh ! take * em UP, whilſt-I've remains o' ſence.
Oh ! gently ! gently: #: if you. be;humane, |
His wounds' Pain-me; gbey teelsall my aſo
For his Ceſonis he: more dearly Loves, | |
Than all the beauties ipith? Elizian Groves, Cletale up nh
Came, my dead Lord, with thy 'Ceſaria dwell : '
In Loye at leaſt, 1 allmySex excell. ; , 1 — by
Now in the dead, and death ere all; my 40's 5, 1 ;
Fl weep till tears and death have qu quencl b'd my eyes... _... (Ex.Ce-
ſonia and her Attendant7, with the body of the Ps. Val. 4. Uildppy Princeſs! the: worlt roſs oh fad. Was an exceſs of Loye;; for. one fo bad:.
LW, | | | : : Now:
| C 351) Now bring the ſextenc@Prig'ners.ip, with "IN
e
: l iJ EF YL (29 210Þ «
Enter Paſtor, Tepidus, Philo, aud phe Jems- AMONG: T0 Nc: 300 1 T8: 31353110
'Your fortunes and freedoms 1 reſtore. er The'tyrants dead, he?ll plague the World no more: ©
 _ Paf. Thedreadfull Emp'ror dead ! good news indeed.
Oh! to his Vices may no Prince ſucceed. ;
Enter Salome, ſhe runsto Lepidus, |
S:zl. Oh ! my dear Love! Lep. My Love ! art thou ſo near ? 'Oh ! how durft thou expoſe thy beauty here ? Sal... ASk me no Queſtians, Iam mad. with-Joy, - And have not ſence to make thee a reply. I in diſtraction came todie with thee, Die in thy arms, and find thee ſafe and free. Val. A. Go,marry ; of each other take your fill, And now you Jews, £0, believe what you will, Paſ. Yes, marry, Son , th'aſt nobly earn'd my leave. Lep. Oh ! with what joy this favour I receive. Phi. Moſt Gallant Youth, not many minutes fince, When the keen weapoty of a dreadfull Prince Wes on your Father drawn, you ſtept between ; Such an Example we have rarely ſeen. Now ſhall we-turn: the edge of Law on you? * More favour'to your piety is due. My Davghter, Sir, I to your arms reſign. Lep. Oh! my dear Love, .th'art mine. Sal.” And thon art mine. Val. A. The1lmperial Throne I can with eaſe aſcend, I know no power which can with mine contend : But ſhow'd 1 reign, the World which thinks me proud Witt-charpe-mewirtrthe'Guitt-of C2ſar's blood, ———— And fay, the horrid Villany was done By my command ; that I might mount the throne. Pd rather be an honeſt ſlave, 1 ſwear, Than buy the Empire of the world fo dear.
H 2
hadderead.: a52 21? - ;
| TIC) ®7s # % Su ID Ca h.31 4
I never yet in- crimes oh When Ive the am mes I And reveng'd Ceſar, ag our Laws require ;
Fil to ſome quiet privacy retire,, -
And there -all-thy powers laid down,
I will be greatin nothing/but renown, And in my ſolitude: till death I I mourn. Over.my Martyr Julia $ my Urs.
f &
SIE CEPT YC 0-008 OTE PIER OC
(Excunt.
FINIS.
w_ 3 BD OO I LY
That you will think him mad who wrote the Play. » Comick humours he takes moſt delight, And yet he rants in Tragedy to night ; And ſtrives to give diverſion for an hour, With « young Prince, mad with exceſs of power. He had that mighty power you all deſire ; Power you all love, and labour to acquire, Some have deſir d a French Invaſion here For «nder them, they hop'd to domineer : But, Oh ? {ud France this nobler Realm ſubdue, Ewry Dragoon wou?d be a Ceſar too. Poor Rogues, who for three-half-pence ſell their Lives,  Wowd lord it Ore your Lands, your Selves, your Wives. What wretched ſlaw ry is, we Geo to day, *T is well you only ſee it in 4 _ Thanks to the Brave, who well deſerve their pay. Some gentle pity we have hopes to move By the misfortunes of ſweet wvertuoms Love. The niceſt. Lady need not bluſh today, At leaſt, at what theWomen ado or ſay.. | Chaſt all the beauties are they repreſent, Their loves are Conjugal or Innocent. We are young aftors ; yet we hope to pleaſe By Aiing Love, for hove with youth ag1#s. Toa love the Attors, who have pleas d you long ; But th Images of Love ſhow'd all be young.
DO mad a Ty ants part I att today
PROLOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. Powell, who AQed the Emperor.
-EPLELOGUE;
BpOKen by a Girl: -
| _ C Inging in Plays 3s grown ſo nmch*in vogue,
| i.'* { had ſome thoughts to f "g the Epilogue.
Sinceſmmging ſuch delight to you affords, _
| To pleaſe you, well all turn, Canary Birds. _
When I'm a Woman, nbich-will be eve long, \
No Man, I ſwear, ſoall have me for a Song,
If youll tempt me, do it with glitt ring Gol,”
And thoſe enchanting words, . To;have and om
11! on thoſe Terms yield to ſome worthy Man, '
Have me be may, and hold me if he-tan. LT fed Well, let me be an Actreſs I'm content, 5
P rovided, Gallants, youllgive your conſent; F F.meanyour gen rons E nconragement. | But to the famors Adtors you reſart, © oO Who#l ap HE ou us to an old Tenns- JV SINE Thither let all the old Gallants repair, And toſs and racket tbe fine Beauties there, Applaud, admire *em, and do "what they will * — If you young Sparks, will pleaſe ſomctimes fo W And prace our Houſe, with an alluring thro, * Mzibinks you ſpowd, "for enoſt.of : 45 are young. ES Tender young plants, moſt of. our Women are; © © Some, it 7s jaid, are ripe enough to bear. _
$94 Spring-Garden which deſerzes your care.
....” Perſons Repreſen ted.
Mr, Powell, Caligula, Emperor of Rome. . Mr: Williams, Valerims Aſiaticus,, General of the Imperial Ar- my in Germayy.
Mr. Simpſon, Annie Minatianus, A neble Roman, Married to one of the Emperor's Si-
ſters. _ Mr. Mills, Vitellins, * Proconſul of 4a. Mr. Thomas, Caſſie Cheres, wy inthe Emperors uard. Paſtor, An old Rowan Knight,
Mr. Evans, Lapham, Paſtor's Son, "Mr. Diſpey, Philo, A Learned Jew, Embaſſador Th from the Egyptian Jews, to
| | the Emperor. -
WO M. E N.
Mrs. Kyight, Ceſonia, _— Fgantary beloved ite. Mrs. Temple, Yulia, A. young beauty, Wife te V alerivs, Mrs.-Croſs, Salome, Phil#s Daughter.
Conſuls, Senators, Guards, Attendants.
The SCEN E, the Imperial Palace of Rome, the Time, the laſt hour of the Emperor's Life.
ACT
ih ' EINE 1k 19 ragaq te, Ka, GP \ 4 my rat pint Books «ich Prin bw 7
[- 4 - 'S 5
V4 FEM aged - 45 BP t © A} ..
courſe upon Re [3 rx Cont in Syacul Effays : With ſome conliderations
Bonner hays Ret DPF obatlYP ptr to the Hongurabſe H Aer rites, uhelaxe Duke of rang Fe. in —__ Vo met
Bpiltles, by.Ca ILSS Ii
wg 147 Re ty bt the obs Mrs. re or knee into one $- Oroonoka; or the [Royal Slave. : - Faiz Jilt, or-Prince 7arqum. Agnes de rr, - or the force of Generous Loye- The overs "Watch, or the Art of Love. The Ladies Looking-G laſs. The Lucky Miſtake : And the Hi- Wi -Dory-of the Nun, or fair bu gr che,
[/- Refle&ons Ancient op Leaftning. its aplain to the t Y Honourable the of Ni The Second E With a beth Re
npen the Epiltles of Phalaris, iflocles, Socrates, an s Fables, by Dr. Bene-
39 - hes, i : The Tandfy Phyſician f fbalag ae Cſs roy 'd agd ator to'ctire Dileaſes. incident ro Human _ AY and 200 haps to Co cople, by
| Geoge or grep, EN A General Tr of —  tbedhes Colleged rein the po #wingyr Pha- ! &ical- Authors, by-Fokn Pechey, of Gori of Phyſicians! | Conte ations Moral ts," Written by the late Lord Chiet Juſtice Hales, to | __ 3s added ws Eiſoor” OI 7r Lord cham of $2tins The thirg' PRrmaphs be thd
Sevile Eſq and 9-
ang gs!
w_ arrne Almangth dr, 9p a Table of the Kings R e the Aer any num bery; Farthings,
: F LAT, Y my bg Al Pears, hc Tingn Roles o v4 ip or of the
| herthy the ron arg; kept an ; alſo LAs Ton om Arn, wk ſtands in-. names
|
[iſ 'of the Counties, Ciwies an.) Burrough-Towns i in England and I/ ales, withthe num hts, Ci | | tizens and nd Brees choſen therein, [to ſerve in Paghament. - 11, The uſual Rat.s and Fares of Coach {wen Carmeh and Watermen- The Sixth Edition, muchEnlarged. | |:
A -Fu4 _ he bye f J& p _*
AY 2330 &
AE
