Canonical Title: THE CITY MATCH
Requested Title: THE CITY MATCH
Authors: Jasper Mayne
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-city-match-_mayne-jasper_1659
Item Title: The city match. ... 1659
Item Creator: Mayne, Jasper.
Item Year: 1659
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE CITY MATCH
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-city-match-_mayne-jasper_1659/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-city-match-_mayne-jasper_1659_djvu.txt
| Twelve 


FT 6 


The City Match. 
Twelve hundred pound a yeure in Kent, ſome thmes 
Score thouſand pound in money, beſides Jewels, Bonds, 
And deſperate debrs, New. And doſt not thou fall downe 
And priy to th* windes to ſacrifice him to * 
Poore John and Mackrell? Zr. Ot invoke ſome rock 
To doe thee juſtice? New. Oc fome compendious Canot 
To take him off ith" middle ? Plow. And why my tender 
Soft-hearted friends? By. What to take thee from the Temp 
To make thee an old Juryman, a Whittington ? zue 
New, To transforme thy pluſh to penny · ſtone; and ſcarleix hat 
Into a velvet Jaeket which hath ſee ne And 
Aleppo twice, is knowne to the great Turke, 
Hath ſcapt, three ſhipwracks to be left off co thee, 
And knowes the way to Mexico as well as the Map ? Did. 
By. This Jacket ſurely was imploy d in finding 'B 
The Northeaſt paſſage out. Or the ſame jacket 
That Ceryat died in. Plum. Very good, New. in Ovid fel 


There is not ſuch a Metamorphoſis 7 
As thou art now. To be turad into a tree et 
Or ſome handſome beaſt is courtly to this. The 
But for thee, Franck, O Tranſmatation!? Ane 
Of Satin chang'd to Kerſy hoſe I ſing. of 


{ 

Slid his ſhooes ſhine too. Br. They have the Greſham dye; | 7 
Doſt thou not dteſſe thy ſelfe by *em? I can ſee : 
My face in them hicher. Plotw. Very pleaſant Gentlemen. 
Br. And faith for how many yeares art thou bound? 

Plaw. Do youtake me for a prentice? New. Why then wha 
Doſt thou beare in the Pariſh this yearc? Let's feele, (office 
No batteries in thy head to (ignifie 


Th'art Conſtable? Br. No furious Jogge broke on it or 
In the Kings name ? Plotw. Did you contrive this ſcene ot 
By the way Gentlemen ? Now. Na, but the Newes 7 
Thou ſhoaldſt turne Trades. man, and this Pagan dre le, * 


In which if thou ſhouldſt die thou wouldſt be damned 
For an Uſyrer, is comicall at the Temple, — 


2 
2 


1 


The City Match) 
e were about to bring in ſuch a fellow 
Fot an Apoſtatein our Antimaſque. 
vue et one to keepe the doore, provide half-crowne roomes; 
or Ile ſet bills up of thee What ſhall 1 
ive thee for the firſt day 2 By. I, or ſecond? 
monor thou't endure twice or thrice comming in. 
er | Plow, Well my conceipted Orient friends, bright Offspring 
pipi female filk-worme, and Taylor male 1 deny not 
Bot you look well in your unpaid for Glory. 
That in theſe colours you ſet out the Strand, 
And adorne Fleet · ſtreet. That you may lavgh at me 
gore Work ing · day oth'Citie,like two Feſtivals 
ſcapt,out of the Almanacke. New. Sitrah Bright, 
Didſt look to heare ſuch language beyond Ludgate ? 
Br. Ithought all wie had ended at Fleet · bridge. 
Bat wit that goes oth* ſcore,that may extend, . 
fe be a Courtiers wit, into Cheapſide. 
Platw. Your Mercer lives there does he? I warrant you 
e has the patience of a barne Heretique: 
The very faith that ſold to you theſe ſilkes 
and thinks you'l pay for em is ſtrong enough 
Fo fave the Iofidell part oth* world, or Antichriſt, 
Je. Br. Wire moſt mechanically abuſed. New, Let's teare 
dis Jacket off. By. A match, take that ſide · Plotw. Hold, hold! 
u. | Br. How fraile a thing old velvet is, it parts They teare off 
ith as much eaſe and williognes as two Cowards. his Jacket 
hat New. The tenderſt weed that ever fell aſunder. 
coy Plotw. Ha you your wits? what mean you? By. Goe,put on 
One of thy Temple ſuits and accompany us, 
Or elſe thy Dimmety breeches be mortall. P/otw. You will 
ot ſtrip me will you? New. By thy viſible eares we will- 
Br. By this two handed Beaver; which is ſo thiune 
{od light a Batterflies wings put co*t would make it 
Mercuries flying hat and ſoare aloft. 

vell 2/1. But do you know to how much danger E 


rle 


8 The City Match, 
Yon tempt me? ſhould, my Uokle know I come 
VVithin the ayre of Fleet-ſtreet—=. New. VVill you make 
Your ſelfe fic for a coach aprine, and come 
Along with us? P/orw: VVell my two teſolute friends 
You ſhall prevaile, Bat whither now are your | 
Lewd motions bent? New: VVeel' dine at Reſeclaps there 1 
VVe ſhall meet Captaine 2»arrfield, and his Poet, 


They ſh1ll ſhew us another fiſh. 

Br: Bat by the way we have agreed to ſee nd! 
A Lady, you Mechanick. Plotw: VVhat Lady? New: Haſk o ſe 
Not thou heard of the new ſprung Lady? Br: One og 


That keeps her Coach · man, Foot-boy, woman, and ſpends n Wi 
A thooſand pound a yeare by wit. Plotw: How ? wit ? | 
New: Thatis her patrimony, Sit; tis thought 

The fortune ſhe is borne to will not buy 

A bunch of turnips - P/orw: She is no gameſter is ſhe ? 

Nor carries falſe dice? Br: No, but has a Tongue, 1 
VVert in a Lawyers month, would make him boy | 
All young heires ocer him. P/orw: But does no man know - Pwe! 


From whence ſhe came? Br. As for her birth ſhe may a! 
Chooſe her own pedigree; it is nknowne VVe 
Whether ſhe be deſcended of ſome Ditch, You 
Or Dutcheſſe. New. She's the wonder of the Court, Has 


And talke oth* Towne. Plorw Her name? New. Aurelia. For 
Pletw. I've heard of her, They ſay ſhe does fight duells, I Befe 


And anſwers challenges in wit. By. She has beene But 
Thrice in the field, Plorw. Ich the field? New: Les, in Springs To. 
Has conquerd with no ſecond but ber woman, (Garden Let 
A Paritan,and has returned with prizes. Befc 

Plotw.And no drum beat before her? New No, nor Colours | No. 
Floutiſh-. She has made a vow never to marcy Are 
Till ſhe be won by Stratagem. Plorw, I long The 


To ſee her. Fr. Ich' name of Guild-ball who comes here? I Ber 
2 EmewTimuby Im 


SCENA V- 


The City Match) 


ScEZNAV. 
To them Timothy. 


F TY pour leave Gentlemen - Pla. Me Timatlhy! 
BM from the New world. I lookt you ſhould 
Ha paſt through halfe the ſignes in Heaven by this. 
nd ha converſt with the Dolphins, What not gone 
o ſea wich your Father? Tim · No faith, Idoe not love 
o goe to ſes, it makes one lowfie, laies him 
n wooden ſheets, and lands him a preſervative 
\ painſt the plague- Beſides my Mother was 
fraid to venture me, Plot. Believ'e ſhe's wiſe, 
Not to truſt ſuch a wit to a thinne frayle bark 
here you had ſaild within three inches of 
Becoming a Jonas, Beſides the toſſing, to have 
All the fierce bloſtring faces in the Map 
well more tempeſtuouſly upon you then 
2wyers preferd,or Trumpeters. And whither 
VVere you bound now? Tim. Ionely came to have 
Your judgment of my fait. Plat. Surely the Taylor 
Has done bis part. Tim. And my mother has done hers, 
For ſhe has paid fort. I never durſt be ſeen 
Before my Father our of Duretta and Serge- 
But if he catch me in ſuch paltry ſtuffes, 
To make me looke like one that lets out mony, 
Let him ſay Timothy was borne x foole. 
Before he went he made me doe what he liſt; 
Now he's abroad Ile doe hat I liſt. VV bar 
Are theſe two? Gentlemen? plorw. You ſee they weare 
Their Heraldry, Tin. But I meane can they roare, 
Beat Drawers, play at dice, and coart their Miſtreſſe? 
1 meane forthwith to get a Miſtreſſe. Plogy, But 
How comes this, Ms 75wocby,you did not 


— ß ei en re 


10 The City Maith; 
Riſe ſach a gallant this morning. Tim. Alls one "Or that: 
My Mother loſt her Maiden · head chat I | 
Might come firſt into th world; and by Gods lid 
Ile beate my ſelfe like the elder brother, I. 
D' you think Ile all daies of my life frequent the 
Saiot Antlins, like my ſiſter > Gentlemen 
I covet your acquaintance. Br. Your ſervant, Sir. 

New. I ſhall be proud to know you. Tim. Sit, my knowledg 
Is not much worth; I'me borne to a ſmall fortune, 
Some hundred thouſand pound, if once my Father V 
Held up his hands in Marble, or kneeld in braſſe. 
VVhat are you Inns of Court-men? New. The Catechiſme 


Jat « 
Jon 


VVerefalie ſhould we deny it, Tim. I ſhall ſhortly Wor 
Be one my ſelfe, I learne to dance allready, With 
And weare ſhort cloakes;I meane in your next Maſque Witt 
To have a part, I ſhall take moſt extreamly. D. 

Br. You will inflame the Ladies, Sir. They'l ſtrive Very 
VVho ſhall moſt privately convey Jewels No ſ 
Into your hand. New. This is an excellent fellow; Ther 
VVhoise? Pletw. Rich Seathrifes ſonne thats gone to ſex Lou 
This morving with my Uncle. Br. 1s this he Clea 


VVboſe ſiſter thou ſnouldſt marry? The wench that brings Doe 
Ten thouſand pound · Plorw. My Uncle would fain have me, And 
But 1 have caſt her off. Br. VVhy? Plorw. Faith ſhe's hand. To! 
And had a good wit, but her Schoole-Miſtreſſe (ſome, {Doe 


Has made het a rank Puritan, New. Lets take him And 
Along with us and Captaine Qgart field ſhall ſhow him. Falſe 

Plotw, Twill be an excellent Comcedy, and afterwards AL 
I have a project on him. Tim. Gentlemen 1 The. 
Shall we dine at an Ordinary? You * 


Shall enter me among the Wits, Plerw. Sir, I VVi 


— — — —— 


The City Match, | | It | 
dat of her Alablaſter. Tim. Lead ong 

long to ſee a Lady and to ſalute her. 23 

| pe Extunt 


mmm 


Ac ru; II. Scan I: 
dg Aurelia: Dorcas. 


V HY we ſhall have you get in time the turne 
Up of your Eyes, ſpeak in the Noſe, draw ſighet 
ne Of an ell long, and raile at Diſcipline. 
would I could heare from Banaſwrigbt, ere Ile be torturd 
With your preciſeneſle thus, Ile get dry palmes 
With ſtarching, and put on my ſmocks my ſelfe. 
Dor. Surely you may, and ayreꝰ em too, there have beene 
Very devour and holy women that wore 
No ſhift at all, Aur. Such Saints you meane as wore 
Their Congregations, and ſwarm d with Chriſtian Vermin! 
You'l hold cleane linnen Hereſie? Der. Sorely yes, 
Cleane linnen in a Surpleſſes That and powders 
Doe briog dry ſummers, make the ſickneſſe rage, 
And th Enemy prevaile. It was revealed 
d. To Ms Scrauple and her husband, who 
e, Doe verily aſcribe the German warte, 
And the late perſecutions, to curling, 
Falſe Teeth, and Oyle of Talck. Arr. Now ſhe is in 
A Lectuter will ſooner hold his peace 
Then ſhe. Dor. And ſurely, 25 Maſter Scruple ſaies, 

Aur. That was her Schoole-maſter.One that cooles a feaſt 
VVicb his long grace, and ſooner eats a Capon ! 
Then bleſſes it, Der. And provetit very well , 
Out of a book that ſufferd Martyrdome : 
By fire in Cheapſide.SinceAmulets,and Bracelets, 
And Love-locks were in uſe, the ptice of ſprats, 


* „ pI_—— — TT < 
4 ” *. 


— 


2 YES 


| 


rere 


ut 


— — —-— 


= Jeruſalem 


— — —— — — — — 
. 


r EL EFES OS cu at. IE eg. > Ate. — 


— —— — — 


g —D 
12 


— — —ũ——— ꝑ IEEE. 
. 9 .! 


be City Match) 
Jeruſalem Artichocks, and Hollsod Cheeſe; 


Is very much increaſed, ſo that the Brethren, 
Botchers I meane,and ſuch poore zealous Saints, 


As exrne five groats a week under a ſtall, A1 
By foging Plalmes,and drawing up of holes, | 
Can't live io their vocation, but are faine Sh, 
To turne— Aur. Old breeches, Dor, Surely, Teachers and 80 

| Prophets] My 

= _ 

: Scrna II. 2 

To Them Baneſwright: — 

V\ 

Mr Baneſwrigbt, ate you come? my woman Ar 

Aur () VVas in bet preaching fit, ſhe only wanted So 

| ATables end. Baneſw.V Vhywhats the matter? Ar V\ 
Poore Lady had ſo much unbred holineſſe (Never He 
About her perſon; 1 am never dreſt 2 He 
VVithour a ſermon, but im forſt to prove Yo 
The lawfulneſſe of curling irons before To 
She l criſp me in àa morning;1 muſt ſhow Th 
Text for the faſhions of my gownes; ſhe | zske Ua 

VVhere Jewels are commanded» or what Lady Yo 

Ith' primitive times wore ropes of pearle or rubyes; Yo 

She will urge Councils for her litle tuffe V\ 

Cal'd in Northampton ſhire;and her whole ſervice Ac 

Is a meere confatarion of my clothes. If 

Baneſw VV by Madam, I aſſure you time hath beene, Th 

However ſhe be otherwiſe,when ſhe bad Yo 

A good quick wit. and would have made co 2 Lady To 

A ſerviceable ſinner. Aar. She can t preſerve lle 

The goifc for which I took her) but (as though Ar 
She V Vere inſpird from /pſwircb)ſhe will make Th 

The Acts and Monuments in ſweet-meats; Quinces De 


Arcaigned aud bath: Gan l wy desde, 


82 


— = — 


The City Match) 


Are perſecutions, and Diosliſiaus dayes 
Are brought for entertainment, and we eat Martyrs. f 
Baue ſw. Madam ſhe is far:e gone. Aar. Nay, Sir, ſhe is 
A Puritan at ber needle too- Bancſw. Indeed? 
Aur. Sbe workes religious Petticous;for flowers 

She'l make Chorch Hiſtories; her needle doth 

So ſanctify my Cuſhionets, beſides, 

My ſmock · ſlee ves have ſuch holy imbroderies, 

And are ſo learned, that I feare in time 

All my apparell will be quoted by 

Some pure Inſtructer. Yeſterday I went 

To ſee a Lady that has a Parror, my woman 

VVhile I was io diſcourſe converted the fowle, 

And now it can ſpeak nought but Knoxes workes, 

So theres a parrot loſt. Beneſ. Faith Madam ſhe 

V Vas earneſt to come to you, had I knowne 

Her Miſtreſſe had ſo bred her / would firſt 

Ha preferred her to new England. Der · Surely, Sit, 

You promiſed me when you did take my mony 

To belpe me to a faichfoll ſervice, a Lady 

That would be ſaved: Not one that loves profane, 
Uaſanctified faſhions. Aur. Fly my fighec 

You gooddy Hofmangand keepe your chamber till 

You can provide your ſelfe ſome cure, ot I 

VVill forthwith excommunicate your zeale, 

And make you a ſilent waiting women. Bave/. MS Dore ds, 

If vou'l be uſher to that holy learned woman 

That can heale broken ſhinnes, ſcald heads, and th? Itch, 

Your ſchoole- miſtreſſe, that can ex50vnd, and teaches 

To knit in Chaldee, and worke Hebrew ſamplers, 

lie belpe you back »gaine. Dor. The motion ſute is good 
And I will ponder of it. Aur. From thy zeale, &x-Dorcas 
The frantick Ladies judgements,and Hiſttiomaſtix, 
Deliver me. This was of your preterting, 
You muſt needs helpe me to another. Baveſ, How 

£2 1111 


„ 


rr 


14 The Citie Match; 
VVould you deſire her qualified,deformed 
And crooked like ſome Ladies, who doe weare 
Their women like black patches to ſet them of 

Aur. I need no foile, nor ſhall I think I me white 
Only between two Moores: or that my noſe 
Stands wrong, be cauſe my womans doth ſtand right 

Baneſ. But you would have ber ſecret, able to keepe 
Strange ſights from th. knowledge of your Knight when you 
Are married Madam, ot a quick faining head? 
. eAur.You wrong me, Baneſ wrig b, ſne whom I would have, 
Moſt to her handſome ſhape have vettue too. 

Baneſw. Well Madam I ſhal fit you. I doe know 
Acholetick Lady which within theſe three weekes 
Has, for not cutting her cornes well, put off 
Three womer;and is now about to part 
VVith the fourth, juſt ode of your deſcription. 
Next change oth' Moone, or weather,wheo her feet 
Doe ake againe, I do believe I ſhall 
Pleaſure your Ladiſhip. Aar. Expect your reward, 
Exit Baneſwright, 


S EN A lll. 


To Her Bright, Newcut, Timothy, Pluwoll. 


—_ let me taſt the Elizium of your lips. (Sir, 
Aur. Why what are you? you will not leap me, 

Pray know your diſtance. Tim. V Vhat am I ſweet Lady? 

My Father is an Aldermans fellow, and 1 

Hope to be one in time. Hur. Then, Sir, in time 

You may be remembred at the quenching of 

Fired houſes, when the bells ring back ward, by 

Your name upon the Buckets. Tim. Nay they ſay 

You have a good wit Lady, and 7 can finde it 

Aſſoont as another: I in my time have been 


ou 


ve, 


ir, 
ne, 


The City Match, 15 

Oth' Univerſity,and ſhould have been a ſcholler. 

Aur, By the ſize of your wit, Sir, had you kept 
To that profeſſion, / can foreſee 
You would have been a great perſecuter of Nature, 
And great conſumer of ruſh Candles,with 
As ſmall fucceſſe,as if a Tortoiſe ſhould 
Day aud night practiſe to run races: Having 
Contemplared your ſelfe into ill lookes, 
In pitty to ſo much affliction, 
You might ba paſt for learned:and t may be, 
If you had fallen out with the Males, and 
Scap't Poetry: you might have riſen to ſcarlet, 

Tim. Here's a rare Lady with all my heart, by this 
Light Gentlemen, now have Ino more language 
Then a dumb patrot, a litle mote ſheeꝰ jeere me 
lato a fellow that tutnes upon his toe 
In a ſteeple and ſtrikes quarters- Br. Aad why ſhould you 
Be now ſo dainty of your lips? vetil 


I They are rot Virgins,they have taſted Man. 


Aur. And may agiine: but then Ile be ſecut'd, 

For the ſweet ayre oth' parties. /f you 

Will bring it me confird d under the hands 

Of foure ſufficient Ladies that you are 

Cleane men, yos may chance kiſſe my woman. Nox. Ladie, 

Our lips are made of the ſame clay that yours, 

And have not been refuſed. Tur. Tis right you are (Cladders 

Two Innes of Conrt-men. Br. Ves, what then? Aur. Known 

Through all the Town?. Br-Cladders? Aur . Yes, Citholick 

From Countrey Madams to your Glovers wife Lovers 

Or Laondreſſe;will not let poore Gentlewomen 

Take phy ſick quietly, but diſturbe their pills 

From operation with your untaught viſits. 

Or if they be employd,contrive ſmall plots 

Below ſtaires with the Chamber-maid; commend 

Her fragrant breath, which * yards of ſalutes, 4 
2 - N 


— — — 


8 16 The Citie Match, 
At foure deflowers 4 Roſe, at three kils ſpiders] 


New.VV hat dangerous truths theſe are? Aar. Ruviſh a lock 


From the yellow waiting-woman,uſe ſtratagems 
To get her ſilver whiſtle,and way-lay 
Her pewter knots ot bodkin. New. Pretty, pretty. 
Br. Touthiok you have abuſed us now ? Aut. Ile tell you; 
Had Ilia all the world but forty Mark, 
And that got by my needle and making ſocks; 
And were that fortie Mark Mil ſizpences, 
Spurroyals, Harry groats. ot ſuch odde coine 
Of husbandty as in the Kings raigne now 
Would never paſſe, I would deſpiſe you. New, Lady, 
Your wit will make you die a witherd virgin. 
Br. We ſhall in time when your moſt tyrant tongue 
Hath made this houſe a wilderneſſe,and you 
As unfrequented as a ſtates man fallen; 
When you ſhall quarrel| wich your face and glaſſe, 
Till from your pencill you have taiſd new cheeks, 
See you beg ſaitors, write Bills ore your doore, 
Here is an ancient Lady to be let. 
New. You think you are handſome now, and that your eyes 
Make ſtar. ſnhooting, and dart? Aur. Tay be I doe. 
New. May I not proſper if I have not ſeene 
A better face in ſigues, or ginger · bread. 
Tim. Ves, I for two pence oft have bought a better) 
Bir. Whata ſweet innocent looke you have! Plotw. Fye 
Abuſe a barmleſſe Lady thus, I car'e (gentlemen, 
With patience heare your bla ſphemies. Make me 
Your ſecond Madam. Tim. And make me your third, 
Aur. O prodigie to beare an Image ſpeake. 
Why, Sir, I tooke you for a Mute ith* Hangiogy. 
Ile tell the faces. Tim. Gentlemen doe I 
Look like one of them Trojans? Aur. Tis ſo, your face 
Is miſſing here, Sir, pray ſtep back againe 
And fill the number;youl hope bave more 


lock 


on, 


ye 
en, 


0 


The City Match) T 
Truth io you then to filch your ſelfe away, 
Aud leave my roome unfurniſnt. P/otw. By this light 
She'l ſend fora Conſtable ſtraight and apprehend him 
For theevery · Tim. Why Lady do you think me 
Wrooghr io a Loome, ſome Dutch peece weavd at Afooreclack? 
Amr, Sorely you ſtood fo (imply, like a Man 
Penning of Recantations,that 1 ſuſpected 
Y' had beene 8 part of the Monopolie. 
But now I know you have a tongue, and ate 
A very Man, Ile think yoo only dull, 
And pray for better otterance. Plotw.Lady you make 
Raſh judgment of bim, he was only ſtruck 
With admiration of your beauty. Tim. Truly 
And ſo1was. Aur. Then you can wonder, Sir? 
Plotw. Yes when he ſees ſuch micacles as you, 
Aur. And love me cant* you? Tim. Love you? By this hand 
Ide love a dog of your ſweet looks; lam 
Enamour'd of you Lady, Aur. Hs, ba, ha, now ſurely 
I wonder you wear not a cap; your caſe 


4 / 


Requires warme things, Ile ſend you forth a Cawdle. Exit, 


Br. The plague of rotten teeth, wrincles, lowd lunges 
Be with you Madam. Tim Had I now pen and inke, 
If I were urgd I'de faine know whether I 
In conſcience onght not to ſet down my ſelfe 
No wiſer then I ſhould be. P/otw. Gentlemen 
How like you her wit? Tim, Wit? I verily 
Believe ſhe was begotten by ſome wit; 
And he that has her, may beget playes on her. 
New. Her wit bad need be good, it finds her houſe. 
Tim. Her houſe ? Tis able to find the Coutt, if ſhe 
Be chaſt to all this wit, I do not think 
But that ſhe might be ſhown, By. She ſpeaks with ſalt, 
And has a pretty ſcornfollneſſe, which now 
Tue ſeen l'me ſatisfied. Nen. Come then way, 
To Reſeclapi. Tim, Lend on, Let us dine? This Lady 1 
unne; 


— ———ꝛů — —— 


18 The City Match. - 


Some buſineſſe with yon. P/orw- Gentlemen walk ſoftly, 
Ile overtake you. Br. Newcat (light ber wit 
Ts come to private meetings, New, I, Ithought 
She had ſome other vertues. Well make haſt, 
VVee'l ſtay without, when thou haſt done informe us 
What the rate is; if ſhe be reaſonable 
Wee l be her Cuſtomers. Plan. Y are metrie, Sir. 
Ex. Br, New. Tim, 
Emer Aurelia, 


SCEN A IV. 


Plotwell, Aurelia. 


Ay ſiſter you may enter, they are gone 
did receive your ticket this morning · What: 
You look the Mine ſhould tun ſtill / Aur. O you are 
A carefull brother, to put me on a courſe 
That drawes the eies oth' Towne upon me, and makes me 
Diſcourſe for Ordinaties, then leave me in'c. 
I will pot off my Ladiſhip,and returne 
To Ms Holland, and to making ſhirts, 
And bands againe. Plotw. I hope you will not. Aar. I 
Repent I left th Exchange. Plotw. Faith I ſhonld laugh 
To ſee you there a grine,and there ſerve out 
The reſt of your Indentares, by managing 
Your Needle well, and making Night- caps, by 
A Chating-diſh in winter morniogs,to keep 
Your fingers pliant. How rarely twould become you 
To run over all your ſhop to paſſengers 
In a fine ſale tune? ¶AHur. What would you have me doe? 
D' you think I'me the Dutch Virgin that could live 


Runnes in my head ſtill. Foot. Sir, My Lady prayes Hater le 
You would diſmiſſe your company ſhe has Foeotman, 


WHT TT Trp OOST HEH OMP AD TT +» 177 


0 


—— — 


The City Match. 15 

By th ſent of Flowers? Or that my familie 

Are all deſcended of Chameleons, 

And can be kept with ayre? Is this the way 

To geta husband to bein danger to be 

Shut up for hooſe-rent,or to weare a gowne 

Oat a whole faſhion,or the ſame Jewels twice? 

Shortly my neighbours will commend my clothes, 

For laſting well, give them ſtrange dates, and cry 

Since your laſt Gorget and the blazing ſtarre. 

Plot. Prythee excule me ſiſter, I can now 

Raine ſhowers of ſilver into thy lap agaiae; 

My Uacle's gon to Ses, and has left me 

The key to th golden fleece. Thou ſhalt be ſtill. 

A Madam, Pen, and to maintaine thy Hononr, 

And to new dub thee take this. But ſiſter, l Gives her 

Expected you ete this out of the Throng 4 Purſe 

Of ſaitors that frequent you, ſhould have been 

Made a true Lady, not one in Type or ſhowe. 

I feare you are too ſcornefull, looke too high. 

Aur. Faith brother tis no age to be put ott 

VVith empty education; few will make Joynturei 

To wit or good patts. I may die a Virgin, 

VVhen ſome old widdow which at every cough 

Reſigoes ſome of her teeth, and every night 

Pats off her Leg as duly as french Hood, 

Scarce weares her owne Noſe, hath no eyes but ſuch 

As ſhe firſt bought in Broad-ſtreer,and every morning 

Is put together like ſome Inſttument, 

Having fall Coffgrs ſhall be wooed,and thought 

A youthful! Bride. Plotw. VVhy ſiſter will you like 

A Match of my projection? you do know 

How ruipous our fathers fortunes are; 

Before he broke you know there was a Contract 

Betweene you and young Sea-tbrift, V Vbat if I 

Makeita wedding? Aar. Marty a foole? in hope x 
| n a 


10 The City Match, * 


To be Lidie Majoreſſe? Plotw.V Vby ſiſter, 1 
Could name good Ladies| that are faine to finde 
V Vir for themſelves and Knights too. Aur. I have heard 
Of one whoſe husband was ſo.meeke, to be 
For need het Gentleman uſher,and while ſhe 
Made viſits above ſtaires would patiently 
Finde himſelfe buſineſſe at Tre-'ripith' Hall, 

Plat. He's only Citie bred, one month of your 
Sharp converſation will refine him;beſides 
How long wilt be ere your diſſembled ſtate 
Meet ſuch another offer? «wr. V Vell Brother 30 ſhall 
Diſpoſe of my affections. Plotw. Then ſometime 
This afternoone Ile bring him bichcr;doe you 
Provide the Pcieſt; your Dining roome will ſerve 
As well as the Church. Aar. I will expe you. 

Exeunt ſeverall waiel. 


SCENA. V. 


Enter Captaine Qari ſield bextiog Reſe-clap. Sali · wit 
and Millicent labouring to patt em. 


Quart. Sue beate you into aire, Roſe. Good Captain. 
2nertfI will by Hector. Reſ.Murder, mutdet, help. 

Quartf. Vou needy ſhifting,couſniog, breaking ſlave. 

CH Nay M* Sale wit, help to part em. Salew. Captaine, 

Quarif.Aske me for monie, dog? Re,. Ohl I am kild. 

Mi. Help. Help.Salew. Nay Captaioe. Q. Men of my coat 

Alill. lle call in neighbours. Murder. Murder. Q. Raſcal( pay? 
Jle make you truſt and offer me petitions 
To goe oth'ſcore-Roſ.Good,tis very good. 

Mil. How does thy head ſweetheart? Roſ. Away be quiet; 
Salew- Roſeclap,you'l never leave this; I did tell you (Mil. 
Laſt time the Captaine beat you what a Lion 
He is being askt for reckoniogs. Aili So you did * 

Fe 


„„ 3) ow ry ts. ed th ed hu AI of wm WwPA SZ HH ZH HOO) wm 


— 


The City Match 


lodeed good Mr Salewir, yet you muſt 
Ever be fooliſh husband. Salew, VVhat if we 
Doe bwe you monie, Sir, iſt fit for you 
To uike it? Rof. VVell,Sir,there is law I ſay 
No more, but there is la. Dearfuld. V Vhat law you Carre? 
The law of nature, Cuſtome, Atmes and Nations, (raioe, 
Frees men of warre from paimeats. R. Tes your Armes Cap» 
None elſe. 2 No fonldiers ought to pay. Saw. Nor Poets: 
All void of monie are privileged, A.. V Vhat would you have, 
Captaines and Poets, Mr Salewit ſaies, 
Maſt never pay. Salem. No, not be askt for monie: 

Reſ. Still I ſay there is law. 2«arrf.Say that againe, 
And by Bellona I will cat thy thront. 

Mill. You long to ſee your braines out. Quartf. V Vhy you 
You John of all Trades,have we been your gaeſts (Mungtill, 
Since you firſt kept a Taverne: when you had 
The face and impudence to hang x buſh 
Out to three pints of Clar et, two of Sack 
1a all the world? Sal w. Aftet that, when you broke, 

Did we here find you out, cuſtomd your Houle, , 
And helpt away your victuals which had elſe 

Laine mouldy on your hands? Ref. Y og did indeed, 

And never paid for'c. Ido not denie, 

But you have been my Cuſtomers theſe two yeares, 

My Jack went not, not Chimaie ſmoakt without you 

I will goe farther,your two mouthes have been 

Two as good eating Mouthes as need to come 

Within my doores, as curious to be pleaſed 

As if you ſtill had eaten with readie monte: 

Had till che meats in ſeaſon; ſtill drunk more 

Then your Ordinary came to. Sele- And your conſcience now 
Would have this paid for? Roſ.Surely fo I cake it. 

Saltw.Was ever the like heard? 244 Tis moſt unreaſonable 
He has a hardened conſcience.Sicrah,Cheater, 

You would be queſtioned for your reckonings, Rogue. 10 
72 


22 The City Matchs 


Roſ. Doe you informe, Quartf, I heare one oth' Sheriffs 


Paid for the bayling of a Carp z Mark. | 
Salew. Moſt unheard of exaRions! Rof. Yet ſarely, Cap- 

No man bad cheaper reckonings then your ſelfe, (taine, 

And M Saliwit here. Qzarrf, How cheap? Reſ. I ſay 

No more good Captaine;not to pay is cheape, 

A man would think. Quart. Sir, Dont you reckon Aire, 

And make it deate to breath in you houſe, and put 

The Noſe to charges? Roſ-Right,perfamd Aire,Captaine- 
Qu«artf. Is not the ſtanding of the ſalt an /tem, 

And placeing of the bread? Reſ. A new way, Captaine. 
Quartf. Is not the folding of your Napkins brought 

Into tbe Bill? Reſ. Pincht Napkins,Captaine,and laid 

Like Fiſhes, Fowles, ot Faces. Salem. Then remember 

How yoy rate fallets, Roſeclap; one may buy 

Gardens as Cheap. Reſ. Yes,M* Salevis,fallets 

Taken from Euclide made in Diagrams, 

And to be eaten in Figares. Quaref, And we muſt pay 

For your inventions, Sir. Ro.. Ot you arg damnd, 

Good, Capta ine, you have ſworne to pay this twelve-month. 
Qaarrf. Pe ice you lowd, bawling Curre;do you diſgrace me 

Before theſe Gallants, See if I don t kill you, 


SC EN A. VI, 
To Them Bright, Ne went. Timothy, Plot well. 


Br. hve you Cxptaine Quart field, and my brave Wit, 
My man of Helicow, ſalute this Gentleman, 
He is a City wit. New. A Corporation v5 
Went to the bringing of him forth · Qaariſ. I embrace him 
Salem. And ſo do I. Tim. You area Port, Sir, 
And can make Verſes, I beare: Salew. Sir, 1 am 
A ſervant to the Muſes. Tim. I have made 
Some ſpeeches, Sir, in verſe, which have been ſpoke 


The City Match 23 N 


By a green Robis Geodſelow from Cheap fide Conduit, 
To my Fathers Company; and meane this afrernoone 
To make an Epitha/amnm upon my wedding. 
A Lady fell in love with me this morning, 
Ask Mr. Francis bere. Plot. Heart you ſpoile all, 
Did not I charge you to be filent? Tim. That's true, 
I had forgot. You area Captaine, Sir? 

LD uartf. Thave ſeen ſervice, Sr. Tim. CaptaineT love 
Men ofthe ſwor&;, and buffe, and if need were 
I can roare too, and hope to ſweare in time, 
Doe you ſee , Captaine. Plot. Nay Cupraine we have brought 
A Gentleman of valour who has been (you 
In Moores fields often, martie it has been 
To ſquite his ſiſters, and demoliſh Caſtards 
At Pimlico. Quarif. Afore me, Mr. Plotiywel, 
I never hop't to ſee you ia ſilk againe. 
Salem. I lookt the next Lord Maiors day to fee you oth Li- 
Or one oth” Batchelour Whiflers, Qaarif. What is ( verie 
Your Uncle dead? Plum · He may in time, he's gone 
To ſea this morning, Captaine, and I am come 
Into your order againe. Bat hark you, Captaite, 

What think you of a Fiſs now? As. Mad wags, mad wages 
'. Br, By Heaven its true, here we have btought ore with us. 
New. Rich Seathrifes ſon, he il make a rare ſea Monſter, 
Quart. And ſhalls be merrie yfaith? By. Salewit ſhiil make 

A ſong upon him. Ne. And Roſeclaps boy ſhall Gog it. 
Salem. We have the properties of the laſt fiſh. Quart. And 

At dinner doe not give him ſea enough, (lfI 

And afterwards if I, and Sa/ewi: doe not 

Show him much better than he that ſhowes the Tombs, 

Let me be turnd into a Sword · ſiſn my ſelfe. | 
Platw.A naturall change for a Captaine. How now Roſeclap, 

Penſive and curſing the long Vacation? 

Thou look'ſt as it thou meanſt to breake ſhortly. Roſ. Aske 

The Captaine wby I am ſad. Quarrf. Faith Gentlemen, 


. 
— — 


24 The City Match. 

I diſciplin'd him for bis rudeneſſe · Plotw; Why theſe 

Are Jadgements, Roſeclap, for deare reckonings. Tin. Art thou 

The halfe Crowae fellow of the houſe? R/. Sir, I 

Doe keepe the Ordinary. Tim. Let's have wine enough 

I meane to drink a health to a Lady, Pletw. Still 

Will you betray your fortune? One of them 

VVill goe and cell her who you are, and ſpoile 

The Marriage. Tim. No, peace. Gentlemen if you! 

Goe in wee l follow. Rof. Pleaſe you enter, dinner 

Shall ſtraight be ſer upon the board, Br. VVee l expect you. 

Come Gentlemen. Tim. But Mr Francis, was that 

The boſineſſe why ſhe calld you back- Plorw. Believe it 

Your Mothers ſmock ſhin'd at your birth, or elſe 

You weare ſome Charme about yon, Tim. Not I truly: 
Plot w. It cannot be ſhe ſhould ſo ſtrangly dote 

Upon you elſe:ſlight had you ſtayd, I think 

She would have wooed you her ſelfe. Tim. Now [remember 

One read my fortune once, and told my father 

That 1 ſhould match a Lady. Plot w. How things fall out? 

Tim. And did ſhe ask you who I was? Plotw.I told herſ yeares 

You werea young Knight, Tim. Good. Pl.Scarce come to th? 

Of your diſcretion yet. Tim. Good ſtill, Pi. And that a great 

Did meane to beg you for his daughter. Tim Moſt rare. (Man 

This afcernoone's the time? Plotw. Faith ſhe 

Looks you ſhould uſe x little Courtſhip firſt, 

That done, let me alone to have the Prieſt 

In readineſſe. Tim, But were I not beſt aske 

My friends conſent? Pl. How: Friends conſent? thats fit 

For none but Farmers ſonnes, and Milk. maids. You ſhall not 

Debiſe your judgment. She takes you for a wit. 

And you ſhall match her like one. Tim. Then I will. (think 
Plotw. Bat no more words to th Gallants. Tim. Doe you 

Jam a (ive and cannot hold. R/. Gentlemen Enter 

The company are (ate. Tim. It ſhall be yours, Roſeclap. 
Platw.Nay,Sir,your fortune claimes precedency. 28 


27 


The City Match, 


on || - Sc8xNA VII. 
Wartthonuſe. Sta-thrift. Cypher; 


Wark. Beck abroad by two Gallants ſay you? C). Tes, Sit: 
Aſſoone 28 you were gone; he only ſtaid 
To put on other clothes. Syath. You ſay my ſonne 
VVent with em too? Cyph. Tes, Sir. War. And whether wen 
Cyph.1 followed em to Reſeelaps Ordinary (they? | 
Ware h. And there you left em? Cyyb. Tes, Sir, juſt before | 
1 ſaw ſome Captaines enter. Seach. VVell, I give | 7 
My ſonne for loſt, undone, paſt hope. are H There is 
No more but this wee*| thither ſtcaight:7ou, Cypher, 
Have your inſtructions. Cypb. Sir, let me alone 
To make the ſtory doleſull Mare · h. Goe, make you ready then! 
Now, Me Seathrift, you may ſee, what theſe Exit, 
Young men would doe left to themſelves. Sea-th.My ſonne 
Shall know he hasa ſiſter. Mare · h. And my Nephew 
„ That once be had an Uncle. To leave land 
be Uato an unthrift is to build on ſand. 


at 
Acrus III. Scena;: I. 
Bright. Nemcut. Plotwell. Roſclap. hanging 
out the picture of a ſtrange fiſh. 
* Br. Ore Jove the Captaine ſoxt him rarely. Reſ.O Sit 
k He is uſed to ir; this is the fift fiſh now 
= That be hath ſhewn thus. One got him twentie pound. 
New. How Reſclap Roſ. Why the Captaine kept him, Sir, 
7 : R 
| A whole weeke drunk, and ſhewd him twice a day. 


New. It could not be like this. Ro. nn 
is 


q 26 The City Match. 


This is the ſtrangeſt iſh, Von I have hung 

His other picture into th fields, where ſome 

Say tis an oregrown Porcupiſez others jay 

Tis the fiſh caught in Cheſhicezone to whom 

The reſt agree, ſaid twas a Mermaid. Plotw. S light, 
Roſclap,ſhal's have a patent of him. The Birds 
Brought from Pera, the hairy Wench, the Camel, 

— Elephant, Dromedar ie, ot Winſor ¶ aft le. 

The Woman with dead fleſh, or She that waſhes, 
Threds needles, writes, dreſſes her children, plaies 
Oth' Virginalls with her feet, could never draw 
People like this. New.O that bis Father were 

At home to fee him. P/orw- Or his Mother come, 
Who followes ſtrange ſighte out of Towne, and went 
To Bra»ford to a Motion. Br. Bid the Captaine haſten, 
Or hee | recover and ſpoile all, Re. Thiare here, 


SCENA, II. 1 


Enter Quart field and Sale wit dreſt like two Trumpeters, | 
keeping the donre: Mei Seathrift and Mrs Hel. | 
land with a Prentice before em 
as Commers in. 


Quart. = back there. sa/e-Pray you do not preſſe ſo hard. 
Quart. Make roome for the two Gentlewomen, 

(Mc Seach. What is' t? 

Sal. Twelvepence a peece. Ms Holl. We will not give t. Q Make 


For the that will then. Plerw. O forthe here's hisMother(roome 


Br. And who's the other? P/arw One Ms Holland, the 

Great ſeamſtreſſe on th Exchange. Me Holl. We gave but a groat 
To ſee the laſt fiſh. Qzart . Gentlewoman, that 

Was bat au Iriſh Sturgeon. Salew. This came from 

The Indies, and eats five Crownes a day in frie (lings, 
Oe livers, and browne paſt, Ms Seath. Well there's three ſhil- 
Pray let us have good places now. Quarrf-Beare back _ R 
Ms Holl. 


= | — —ů— 
The City Match. 27 

Ms Holl. Look Ms Seathrift here be Gentlemen: 
Sare tis a rare Fiſh, Ms Seach.1 know one of em, 

Ms Hol. And fo doe 1, his ſiſter was my prentice. 
Ms Scarb,Lets take acquaintance with him, P/orw-Ms Feat hriſt. 
Hath the fight drawoe you bither? Ms Seath, Yes Sir 1 
And Ms Holland here, my Goſſip, paſt 
This way and fo cald in. Pray, Mr Pletwell, 
1s not my ſon here? I was told he went 
Wich you this morning. Plotw. You ſhall ſee him ſtraight. 
Ms Holl. When will the Fiſh begin, Sir? By. Heart ſhe makes 
A puppet play. Plorw. Why now they only ſtay (him 
For companie, t has ſounded t ice. Ms Scath Indeed 
long to ſee this fiſh; 1 wonder whether 
They will cut op his bellie, they ſay a Tench 
Will make him whole againe. Ms Holl. Look Ms Seathrift, 
What clawes he bas. Ms Seatb.For all the world like Crabs. 
Ms Hl. Nay marke bis feet too. Ms Searh-For all the world like 
Br. Ws ever bettet ſport heard? Nen · Prithee peace. ¶ Plaice, 
Ms Hel pray can you read that? Sir, / warrant you, 
That cells where it was caught, and what fiſh tis, 


— 623 — 


plotw. Within this place is to be ſeent, 
eA wondrous Fiſh. God ſave the Queen, 


u, Ms Hell, Amen, ſhe is my cuſtomer, And I 
t: | ave ſold her bonelace often. Br. Why the Queene? 
ke © Tis writ the King. Plotw,That was to make the time. 
ne & Fr. Slid thou didſt read it as*cwere ſome picture of 
An E/z.abeth fiſn Quarif. Beare back there. Salem Mike room, 
at Friend you that were going to cut a purſe there make 


Way for the two old Gentlemen to paſſe, Enter Wave: 
Ware · b. What muſt we give? Quartf. We bouſe and Set 
gs, rake a ſhilling Sir, — Jiſ- 
lil Saltw, It is no lefle-Searh.Pray God you: fiſh “““ 
be worth it. | 


VVbat 


28 The City Match. 


What is't x whale yon take ſo deare? Quart. It is 
Afiſh taken in the Indies. are. h. Pray diſpatch then, 
And ſhow't,us quickly. Salem. Pray forbeare, you d have 
Your head broke Cobler. Ware · h. Vonder is my Nephew 
In bis old Gallantry. Srath. Who's there too? my wife? 
And Ms Holland? Nay / lookt for them. 
Bat where's my wiſe ſonne? Waresb. Maſſe 7 ſee not him: 
Quarif. Keep out Sir. Salew.V Vaterman you muſt Cyther 
not enter. 1 
Quartf. This is no place for ſcullers, Cyph. I muſt lite aws 
needs ter man. 
Speak with one M' Pletwell- Quart. You moſt ſtay, 
Salew. Thtuſt h m out. Cyph.And one Mr Seathrife 7% thruſt 
On urgent buſineſſe. Saum They ate yet imployd 
In waigh:ier affaices,make faſt the doore. 
uartf. There ſhall no more come inzcome in boy. Scat · Dont 
They ſpeak as if my ſonne were in the roome? 
Ware. h. Ves, pray obſerve and marke em-Qsarrf-Gentlemen] 
And Gentlewomen, you now ſhall ſee 2 ſight. 
Europe nete ſhow's the like; bebold this fiſh. Pr 8 
Ms Hol, O ftraoge, logke how it ſleeps. Br. Tig ub) a ep 
Juſt like a Salmon like a ſtrange 
Upon a ſtall in fiſnſtteet. Ms Seach. How it f#þ. 
ſnorts too, 
Juſt like my husband. 7FY arch: Tis very like a man. 
Seat h. I' bas ſach a noſe and eyes.Salew.V Vby tis a Man fiſh; 
An Ccean Centaure, begot between a Syren 
And a he ſtock fiſh. Scath · Pray where rooke ye him: 
Quarif We tooke him ſtrangly in the Indies, neere 
The mouth of Rio de la plata, a ſleep 
Upon the ſhore juſt as you ſee him now. (to land? 
Ms Holl. How ſay y, a ſleepe. YYare-h.Homw?would he come 
Seath.Tis ſtrange a fiſh ſhould leave bis Element. 
Qyartf.Aske bim what things the Country told us. Sal. Vol 
V ill ſcarce believe itnow. This fiſh would walke you 


-- . 


= "1h tf 


Tm 


we ld th. ai. ot i „ .1 od as .y a A =O FA. wd MA dl 


— a8 


The City Match, 19 
Two or three miles oth' ſhore ſometimes;break houſes; 
Raviſh a naked wench ot two, (for there 

V Vomen goe naked)then ranne to Sea againe, 

Quarif. The Country has bin laid, and warrants granted 
To apprehend him. Vare- h. I doe ſaſpeR theſe fellowes, 
They lye as if they bad patent for'e- Seath. The compavy, 
Should every one believe his part, would ſcarce 
Have faith enough among us, VVare h. Marke againe. 

Salew. The States of Holland would have bought him of us 
Out of a great deſigne.Seath. Indeed Salew. They offer'd 
A thouſand dollars: Quart: Ton cannot enter yet. Some knock- 

Mare. Indeed?fo much?pray what to doe? sa,. V Vby Sc. 
They were in hope in time to make this fiſh 
OffaRion 'gainſt the Spaniard, and doe ſervice _ 

Uato the ſtate.Seath-As How. Salew.V Vhy, sc, next plate. flect 

Io dive, bote holes i th bottome of their ſhips, 

And ſink em; you muſt thiok a fiſh like this, 

May be taught Mach IAV TL, and made a ſtate-fiſh; 
Plum. As dogs are taught to fetch. New-Or Elephants 

To dance on ropes. Br. And pray what Honour would 

The States have given him for the ſervice? Quarrf, That, 

Sir, is uncertaine. Sa/ew, Ha made him ſome ſea Count; 

Ort may be Admirail. Plow, Then, ſit, in time, 

Dutch Authors that writ Mare Liberum, 

Might dedicate theit books to him ? Sem. Tes, being 

A fich idvanc t. and of great place. Sing boy. 

You now ſhall heare a ſong upon him, By, Liſten 

New. Doe they not act it rarely? Plotw. If twere t heit tradg 
They could not doe it bettet. Scat. Heate you that (ic? 

VV are«b. Still 1 ſuſpect. Ms Hol. I warrant you this fiſh 
VVill ſhortly be in a Ballad: Sa,. Begin boy 


C Song: 


- 


The City Match; 


Song. 
We ſtom no monſtrous (rocodiley 
Nor any prodigy of Nil. : 
Ne Remora that ſtops Tour fleet, 
Like fer geants Gallants in the ſtreet. 
No ſea-horſe,which can trot or pace, 
Or ſwimme falſe gallop, peſt ,or races 
For crocked Dolphins we not care, 
T howgh on their back a fidler were. 
T he like to thus fiſh which We ſhew, 
Wa neer in Fiſbſtreet Old, or New. 
Nor ever ſervd to th* ſberiffi board, 
Or kept in ſonſe for the Major Lord. 
Had old Aſtronomers but [eene 
T bu fiſh,none elſe in Haven had bien. 


M* Hel. The ſong has wakned him, look, be ſlitres. Tim. Oh 
Captaine--pox- · take · you - Captaine. Ms Sea. Hark be ſpeaks, i 
Tim. Oh- my · ſtomack. *. How's this? Se, Ile pawn my life 
This is impoſture. Tim. Oh-Oh— Plot. Heart, the Captaine 
Did not give him his foll load · Mars · h. Can y our fiſh 

Speak, friends? the proverb ſaies th are mute. Qu. Ile tell you 
You will admire how docile he is, and how { 
Heel imitate a mad tell him your name | | 
He will repeat it after you, be has heard me | 
Calld Captaine, and my fellows curſe ſometimes, 

And now you heard him fay pex take you Captaine, 
Salew. And yeſterday 1 but complaind my ſtomack 
Was overchargd,and how he minds it? New. ſtrange? 

Br. I, is it not?Plotw, The towardoeſle of a fiſh: 
Saliw. Would you think when we caught him he ſhould ſpeak 
'Drake, Draks. Br. And did he? Qs. Yes and Hawkins; 
A figne he wat a fiſh that ſwum there, Wben | 
Thele zn cowpalt the world: Arr, How e learve | 

eir 


ww WW ” Wor 


The City Match, zr 


Theic names I wonder. Sal,w From the failers, New That 
Qs. He l call for drink like me, or any thing (may be. 

He lacks. Tim. O- God my · head. Qi. D you heare bim?7.Oh, 

Hoſteſſe -a ba ſon · Plow. ſlid be't ſpew. Br. No matter. 
Quart. Nay I have ſeene bim foxt, and then maintaine 

A drunken Iualogue. A, Hall. Lord how 1 long 

To heare a litle- Pray trie him with ſome queſtions, 

Will you, my friend ! Quart. Sometimes he will be ſollen, 

And made no anſwers. Salem. That is when he's angred, 

Or kept from drink long. Quart. Bat Ile try him: Ms Sea. 

To ſee what Creatures may be brought to. Quart. Tim, 

Tou are drunk. Tim. Plague take you Captaige—Oh— Lord 

Tou—-made-me--Sea. S' death my ſonnes name. Ii. D you 

Sal. Hel anſwer to no name but that. Q. And Tim, (call him 

What thivke you of a wench now? Tim- Oh rme ſick 

W here is ſhe, Oh. Srath· Ile lay my life this fiſh 

Is ſome confederate Rogue: Quart,. I drinke t* you, Timothy, 

In ſack. Tim. Ohl Oh. Qaartf. A health, Tim. Tim. I can driok 

No more, Oh. Sal w. What not pledge your Miſtreſſel Tim. Oh, 

Let me alone. Salem He is not in the mood now 

Sometimes you'd wonder at bim. Q»arrf-He is tired 

VVith talking all this day, That and heat 

Of company about him, dall him. #are-b.Surely, 


My friends, it is to me a miracle 


To heare Fiſh ſpeak thus · Qnart,. So, Sits, t has been 
Two thouſands more. Sa. Come now next Michaelmas, 
Tis five yeare we have ſhown him in moſt Courts 
In Chriſtendome, and you will not believe, 
How with meere travelling and obſervation, 
He has improv'd himſelfe, and brought away 
The language of the Country. Seath, May not 1 
Aske him ſome queſtiom? Quer:f. Sit, you may, but he 
Will anſwer none bat one of us. Mi Sea. He's uſed, Knocking 
And knowes their voices-Salew. He is ſo Ms. Now at diert. 
VVe'l open doote. JV are. h. ag my beliefe doth tc}! — 
2 There 


32 The City Match; 
There is 4 miſt before our eyes. Seath. I mar'le 
My wiſe ſonne miſt this ſhow. Quar:-Good people, we 
Doe ſhow no more to day; if yon deſire They draw the Cure 
To fee, come to us in Kings ſtreei to Morrow. taine before him. 
Ms Hell. Come Goſſip let us goe, the Fiſh is done. 
Ms Stath. By your leave Gentlemen. Truly tis a dainty fiſh. 
Exit Ms Seath. Ms Holland, and Premice. 


ScEBNA III. 


Enter te them Cypher like a Water- man. 


Cob, Ray which is M Plorwell?Plotw. Þ me he, friend; 
What is your buſineſſe? Cyph. Sir, 1 ſhould ſpeake 
Young Mr Seathrift too. Plotw. Sit, at this time. (with 
Although no Crab like yon, to ſwim backward, he is 
Of your element.Cyph.Upon the water? Plorw. No 
But ſomethiog that lives int. If you but ſtay 
Till he have ſlept himſelfe a land Creature, you may 
Chance ſee him come a ſhore here, Tim. Oh--my head-- 
Ch» Captaine.- Me Francy»-Captaine=-Oh-» 
Plot w. That is his voice Sir,seath, Death, O my ſoule, my ſon? 
Cyph. He is in drink, Sir, is be? Plorw. Surely friend 
You area witch, he is ſo. Cyph. Then I muſt tell 
The newes to you, tis ſad. Pletw. Ile hear t as ſadly. 
5. Your, Uncle, Sit and Mr Scathrift are 
Both drowad ſome 8 mile below Gretuwich. Pl. Drowud? 
Cyph.They went ith Tilt boat, Sir, and I was one 
Otb oates that rowed em, à Cole · ſhip did ore run us, 
I ſcapt by ſwimming, the two old Gentlemen 
Took hold of one another, and ſunk together. 
Br. How ſome mens prayers are heard? we did invoke 
[The ſea this morning. and ſee, the Thames has took em 
Plorw. It cannot be, ſuch good newes, Gentlemen, 
Cannot be true. Mare: h Tis very certaine, Sit, 1 
Was 


| 
| 
{ 
/ 


The City Match; 


Tits talke upon th Exchange: Seath. We heard it too 


In Pauls now as we came- P/otw-There friend, there is 


A fayre for yon; 1*me glad you ſcapt;I had Gives him mony. 


33 


Not knowne the newes ſo ſoone elſe- Cypb. Sir excuſe me, 


Plos. Sit, it is conſcience; / doe believe you might 
Sue me in Chaxcery. Cypb · Sit, you ſhow 


The vertues of an Heyte. Ware b. Are you rich Mars · bonſe 


Heire, Sit? Plotw. Les, Sit, his tranſitory pelfe, 
Aad ſome twelve hund ted pound a yeare in eatth, 
Is caſt on me. Captaine, the houre is come, 

You ſhall no more drink Ale, of which one draughg 
Makes Cowards, and ſpoiles valoar;nor take off 
Your moderate quart · ꝑlaſſe. I intend to have 

A Masket for you, or glaſſe Canon, with 

A moſt capacious barrell, which we'l charge, 

Aad diſcharge with the rich valiant grape of 

My Uacles ſellat, every charge ſhall fire 

The glaſſe,aod burne it ſelfe ith fill ag, and look 
Like a peece going off. Qu=arrf. I ſhall be glad 


Io givethaoks for you, Sir in pottle draughts, 


And ſhall love Scotch cole for this wrack the better; 
As long as I know foell. P/orw-Then my Poet, 

No longer ſhall write Catches,or thinne Sonnets, 
Nor preach in verſe, as if he were faborn'd 

By him that wrote the whip,to pen leane Acts, 


And ſo to overthrow the ſtage for want 
3 ſalt or wit · Nor ſhall he need torment 


Or petſecute bis Maſe; but I will be 

His God of wine t ioſpire him, He ſhall no more 
Converſe with the five yard butler, who like Thunder 
Can turne beere with his voice,and roare it ſower? 
But ſhall come forth a Sophoc/es,and write 

Things for che Baskin. Inſteed of Pegaſus, 

To ſtrike a ſpring with's hoofe, we I have ſteel 


"Which ſhall bat couch a Bur, and ſtraight ſhall flow 


C 3 


- 


— ͤ¶ÄK m m 


34 De city Match: 
A purer, higher, wealtbiet Helicon. ; 
Salew. Frank, Thou ſhalt be my Phabus, My next Poem 
Sball be thy Uocles Tragcelie, or the life 
And death of two Rich Merchants, Plotw. Gentlemen, 
And now yfaith what thiok you of the fiſh? (think 
Ware-b, Why as we ought, Sir, ſtrangely, Br. But d' you 
It is a very fiſn? Seath.Yes, New. Tisa man. 
Plotw. This valiant Ciptaine and this man of wit 
Firſt foxt him, then trans form'd him. We will wake him 
And tell him the newes. Ho Mr Timothy! (work ſtill? 
Tim, Plague take you Captaine. Plotw. What does your ſack 
Tim. Where am 1? Plem. Come y' have ſlept enough. Br. Mr 
How in the name of freſh Cod came you chavged (Timothy 
Into s ſea Calfe thus? New. Slight, Sir, here be | 
Two Fiſhmongers to buy you; beat the price 
Now y are awake, your ſelfe. Tim How's this ꝰ my hands 
Trcanſmuted into Clawes? my feet made flownders? 
Arrayd in Finnes, and ſcales?arn't you ; 
Aſhimd to make me ſuch a Monſter?pray 
Help to undreſſe me. Plorw.We have rare newes for you. 
Tim. No letter from the Lady 7 hope? Plot w. Your Fathers 
And my grave Uncle, Sir, are caſt away. 
Tim. How? Plotw. They by this have made a meale 
For Jacks and Salmon, They are drownd, Br.Fall downe 
And wo: ſhip ſez»coales, for a ſhip of them 
Has made you, Sir, an Heire, Plorw, This fellow here 
Brings the auſpicious newes; And theſe two friends 
Of ours confirme it. (yy Tis too true, Sir. Tim. Well, 
We are all mortall; but in what wet caſe 
Had I been now, if I had gone with him. 
Within this fortnight I had been converted 
Juto ſome Pike, vou might ha cheapned me. 
In Fifp»ftriet; 1 hid made an Ordinary, 
Perchance at the Mermaid:Now could I cry 
Like any Image in a fountaine which H. _ 
| uns 


De City Match) >5 
Runs Lamentations. O my hard misfortnne! 
Seath,Fie Sit, good truth it is not manly in you. Hi feignes 
To weep for ſuch a ſlight loſſe as a father, to Weepe., 
Tim. I doe not cry for that-Searh. No? Tim.no;but to think 
My mother is not drownd too.Seath. I aſſure you, 
And that, a ſhrewd miſchance, Tim. For then might I 
Ha gone to th' Counting houſe and ſet at liberty 
Thoſe harmeleſſe Angels, which for many yeares 
Have beencondemnd to darkneſſe. Plot. You'd not doe 
Like your penurious Father, who was wont 
To walke bis dinner out in Pauls, whiles you 
Kept Lent at home, and had, like folk in ſeiges, 
Your meales weighed to you. New. Indeed they ſay he was 
A Monument of Paz/s. Tim. Yes, he was there 
As conſtant as Dake Humphrey. I can ſhow 
The prints where be ſate, holes ith' loggs. Plotw. He wore 
More pavement out with walking then would make 
A row of new ſtone-Sziats, and yet refuſed 
To give to th reparation. Br. Ive heard 
Heed make his Jack goe emptie to couſen neighbours. 
Plotw.Yes,when there was not fire enough co warme 
A Maſtick patch t* apply to his wives Temples. 
In great extremity of toothach. This is 
Ttue, Me Timothy, iſt not! Tim. Ves. Then Linnen, 
To us was ſtranger then to Capuchini. 
My fleſh is of an Order with wearing ſhirts 
Made of the ſacks that brought ore Cutchyneele, 
Copprice, and Indico, My (iſter weares 
Smocks made of Corrant-bags. Seath, Ile not endure it. 
Lets ſhow our ſelves. Ware- h. Stay, heare all firſt. New. Thy 
Wes ſuch another. Plotwz I have heard (Uacle 
He till laſt lefeth* Exchange; and would commend 
The wholſomeneſſe oth? aire in Moore: field, when 
The clock ſtruck three ſometimes. Plotw. Sutely my ſelſe, 
ober his factor, and an ancient Cat, 
: C 4 Did 


: 
| 
| 
; 
|, 
: 


— — — 


38 The City Matches 
Did keepe ſtrict diet, had our Spaniſh fare, 71 
Foure Olives among tbree, My Uncle would 
Look fat with faſtiog; I ha koowne him ſutfet | 
Upon a bunch of Rayſins, ſwoone at hight 
Of a whole joynt, and riſe ao Epicure T hey undiſguiſe, | 
From halfe an Orange. Ware- h. Gentemen tis falfe. 
» Caſt off your Clowd, D' you know me, Sir / Plotw. My Uncle! 
Sea. And doe you know me, Sir? Tim My Father ! War. Nay, 
Vye l open all the plot, reveale your ſelfe. | 
Plotw. Cypher the waterman! 2s. Sale wit away; Exit Qs. 
I feele a tempeſt comming. Ware. Are you ſtrack Jae wit. 
VVith a Torpedo, Nephew? Seath. Ha you ſeen too 
A Gorgons head that you ſtand ſpeecbleſſe? or 
Are you a fiſh in eatneſt? Br. Ir begins to thunder. 

New. VVe will make bold to take out leaves, Fare. What is 
Your Captaine fled> Seatb, Nay Gentlemen, forſake _ 
Your Compnay? Br, Sir, we have buſineſſe. Sea. Troth 
It is not kindly done. Var. Now, Mr Seathrife, Ex. Br. News 
You ſee what Monroers we had had, had we 
Been wrackt in earneſt. My grievd Nephew here 
Had made my ſellat flow with teates, my wines 
Had chargd glaſſe Ord'oance, our funeralls had been 
Bewaild in pottle draughts. Seath. And at our graves 
Your Nephew and my Sonne had made a Penegyrick, | 
And opend all our vertues. . Ungrateful Monſter. | 
Sea. Uanaturall villaine. Wareb. Thou Enimy to my bloud. 
Sea. Thou worſe then Parricide. War. Next my ſianes I doe 
Repent I am thy Uacle. Ses. And Itby Father, 

Warth Death O my ſoule, did] when firſt thy Father | 

Broke ineſtate, and then broke from the Counter 

VVhere Mr Seathrife laid him in the bole, 

For debt among the raines of the City, 

And Trades like him blowne up, take thee from duſt, | 

Give thee fcee education, put thee in 
X | Wy. 


The City Match. 37 

My owne faire way of traffique; nay decree 
To leave thee Jewels, Land, my whole eſtate, 
Pardond thy former wildneſſe, and couldſt thou ſort 
T by ſelfe with none but idle Gallants, Captaines, 
And Poets,who maſt plat before they ear, 
And make each meale a ſttatagem? Then could none 
Bat be ſabject of thy impious ſcoffes? 
I {woone at ſight of meat; I riſe a Glutton 
F:om halfe an Ocaoge; V Vretch, forgetfull wretch; 
Fore Heaven I count it treaſon in my bloud. 
That gives thee a relation. Bat le take 
A fultrevenge Make thee my Heyre? Vle firſt 

Adopt a ſlave, brought from ſome Gally; One 
Which Lawes doe put into the Inventory, | 
And men bequeath in Wills with ſtooles, and braſſe pots. 
One who ſhall firſt be houſhold ſtuffe, then my Heyre- 
Ot to defeat all thy large aimes Ile marry; \ 
Cypher,goe finde me Baneſwrighi; he ſhall ſtraight 
Provide me a wife, I will not ſtay to let 
My reſolution coole. Be ſhe a wench 
That every day puts on her Dowry, weares 
Her fortunes, has no portion, ſo ſhe be 
Young and likely to be fruitfull, l le have her; 
By all thats good 7 will; this afcernoone; 
J will about it ſtraight, Se. 1 follow you- Ex ware. 
And as for you Tin Mermaid, Triton. Haddock, Cypb- 
The wondrous /»dian Fiſs caught neere Peru, 
VVho can be of both Elements, your ſight 
VVill keep you well. Here I doe caſt thee off, 
Andinihy roome pronounce to make thy ſiſter 
My beyre; it would be moſt unnaturall; 
To leave a Fiſb on Land. Laſſe,Sir,one of your 
Bright finnes and pills muſt (wim in ſeas of ſack, 
Spout rich Canaries up like V Vhales in Maps, 
_ { know you'l not eadure to ſee wy Jack 8 

Zoe 


238 The City Match; 
Goe empty, not weare ſhices of Copprice bag. 
Nor faſt in Paalnyou. I doe hite thee now, 
Worſe then a Tempeſt, Qaick · ſand, Pytate, Rock 
Ot fatall Leake,[,or a Privy ſeale. 
Goe let the Captaine make you drank and let 
Your next change be into ſome Ape, (tis ſtale 
To be 1 Fiſt twice) or ſome active Baboove- 
And when you can find mony out, betray 
What wench ich Roome has loſt her maiden- head; 
Can mount to ch King, and can doe all your feats, 
If your fine chaine, and yellow coat come neere 
Th' Exchange, Ile fee you, ſo I leave you.Plotw, Now Ex. Sca: 
Were there a dextrous beame and two · pence hemp, 
Neves had man ſuch cauie to hang himſelfe. 
Tim, I have brought my ſelfe to a fine paſſe too. Now 
Am I fit only to be caught, and put a 
Ieito a pond to leap Carps, or beget 
A goodly race of Picktel. 


SCEN A IV. 


To them Zuartfield. Salewit. Roſeclap, 
and BaneſWright. 


Quarif [4 Ow now mad Lads,what? is the ſtorm broke up? 

Salem · What ſad, like broke Gamſters?Mr Timothy 

*Slight who would think your Father ſhould lay weeles 

To catch you thus? Tim. If ever I be drunk 

Wich Captaines mote . Plotw, Where's Bright and Newcut? 

Were ſent for ro the Temple, but left word {Salew, They 

They would be here at ſupper- Plotw. They are ſure friends, 

To leave us in diſtreſſe: Quarif. V Vhat a mad plot 

Theſe two old Merchants had contriv'd, to faine 

A voyage, then to hunt you out diſguiſed, * 
q 


The City Match.” 39 


And beire themſelves abuſed? Salim. We heard all. 
Dnartf. If I had ſtaid they had paid me for a Captaine: 
'Solew, They had a fling at me. But doe you thin 

Your Uncle in this farious mood will marry? 

plot w. He deeply ſwore it: if he doe, the ſleight 

Upon the cards, the hollow dye, Park corner. 

And Shooter: hill are. my revenue. Tim. Yes, 

And as for me, my deſtiny will de 

To fight by th' day, catty my Kitchen, and 

Collation at my back, weare orderly 

My ſhirt in courſe, after it has been the ſhife 

Of a whole Regiment in the Low=Comuntriess 

And after all tetu tue with halfe a leg, 

One arme perchance, my noſe ſhot off, to move 

Compaſſion in my father, who in pitry 

To ſo much tuine may be brought to buy 

Some place for me in an Hoſpitall, to keep me 

From Bridges, Hil- tops, and from ſelling ſwitches. Fut. Roſeel) 

Roſ. Yonders your Uacle at the field dore talking 
With Baneſwright,as hot, and earneſt for a wench, = 
As a recoverd Alonßtur. Quart. What is this Baveſwright t 
Sali w. A fellow much imploid about the Towne, 

That contrives Matches. One that brings together 

Parties that never ſaw,or ever met, 

Till't be for good and all. Knowes to x penny 

Eſtates and Joyntures; Vie undertake he has 

Now lying by him unprovided ſome twenty 

Widdowes of all fortunes that wane husbands, 

And men that want wives,and at an houres warning 

Can make things ready for the Prieſt. Querrf.Ler us 

Deviſe to get him bither and croſſe the Match, 

Plot w. I have great intereſt in him, che fellow loves me. 

Could I ſpeak with him and draw him to be 

An Actor in't, I have a ſtratagem. 

That can redeeme all, and turne the plot. Enter Bausſwrigbi. 

„ Upon 


45 The City Match. 

Upon theſe ſage heads. Salew. By Niusrva, look? - \ 

Heres Baveſtvright. Plot. Mr B aneſwright! Ban. Save you Gal? 
Plotw. You are imploid I heate to find a wife out (lants, 

For my young ſprightly Uncle. Baveſ. Sir, he has . 

Retain d me to that putpoſe. I Jaſt now 1 

Came from him, Plow. And do yon mean the match 

Shall then proceed? Baeſw. 1 have a Leiger wench 

In readineſſe, he's gone to put himſelfe 

Into fit ornaments, for the ſolemaity. 

I'me to provide the. Ptieſt and Licence, we go 

Some two houtes hence to Church, Qa. Death you Pander, | 

Forbid the banes, or I will cut your wizzell, ' 

And ſpoile your ſquiriog in the dark; I've heard | 

Of your lewd function, Sirrab; you preferre h 

VVenches to Bawdy- houſes, Raſcall. Beneſw- Good, Sir. 


Threaten me not in my vocation. 
Pletw. VVhy Baneſwright you can be but paid, ſay 1 

Procare the wench, a friend of mine; and double 

Your bargain, ſuch a faire reward me thinks 

Should make thee of my Project. Thou doſt know 

My fortunes are engaged, and thon mayſt be 

The happy inſtrument co recover em. 

Be my good Angel once, I have a plot 

Shall makethee famous. Quartf. By Mar: deny, and 1 | 

VVill act a Tragedy upon thee. ZBareſ. Gentlemen, 

I am a friend to wit, but more to you Sir, - | 

Of whoſe misfortunes I will not be guilty, | 

Though, then, your Uncle have imploid me, and 

Have deeply ſworne to wed this afcernoone, 

A wife of my providing, if you can | 

O' rereach the aogry Burgeſle, Sir, and bring 

His wiſdome to the Ginne, ſhow me the way 

Ile help to lay the trap. Quarif. Now thou art 

An honeſt hearted pimp, thou ſhalt for this | 

Be drunk in Vine Dee, Raſcallz Vle begin 


— Cl — — 
* 
* 


The City Match. 


A Runlet to thee. Plow, Gentlemen lets in, 
Tie tell you my deſigne; you. Saliwit, muſt 
Trans forme your ſelfe to a French Deacon. 

have parts for Bright and Newcut too, Miſchiefe 

Upon their abſence. Sale. Wee fend for'em Pit. Aud 
For Me Timothy ] have 2 project. a 
Shall make his father everla ſively 

Admire his wit, and aske him bleſiing. Qgart. Come, 

Lets in and dripk a health to our ſacceſle. 

Tin. I'me for no healths unleſſe the glaſſe be leſſe. 


Exennt, | 


Tr — * * 


— — — — — 


Acrtvs IIII. Sczna I, 


Seathrift. Ns Seathrift, Ms Holland, Ms Scruple. 


Did commit her to your charge that you 
1 Might breed her, Ms Scraple, and doe require 
Her at your hand; Here be fine tricks, indeed; 
My daughter S»/as to be ſtolne a week, 
And you conceale it;you were of the plot, 
I doe ſuſpeR you. Ms Scru Sir, will you but heare 
Me meeklyꝰ Scath. No, le never truſt againe 
A woman with white eyes, that can take notes, 
And write a Comment on the Catechiſme. 
All your devotion's falſe; iſt poſſible 
Sbe could be gone without your knowledge?Ms Sera Will you 
Attend me, Ms Seathrif:? If my husbard 
To weane het from love courſes, did not take \ 
More paines with her then with his Tueſday Lectures, 
And if I did not every day expound 
Some good things to her gainſt the ſinne oth' fleſh, 
For feare of ſuch temptations, to which fraile girles 
Are very ſubject, let me t ever more 
Be thought fic to inſttud young Gentlewomen, 


42: The City Match, 


Or deale in Ten · ſtitch. Who ere twas that ſeduced her] 

She took my daughter Emlins gown and ruffe, 

And left her own-cloatbes: and my Schollers ſay 

She often would write Letters. Seath . Why tis cight 

Some ſilenc't Miniſter has got her that I 

Should breed my daughter in a Conventicle! | 

Vs Seath, Pray husband be appeay'd. Sear: You are a fool. 

M.. Seath, You heare her Ms. could not help it. Seach. Nor 

Your ſon help being a fiſh, Ms, Hol. Why, Sir, was he 

The firſt that was abus d by Captaines? Seath. Goe 

You talke like prating Goftips. CA; Hall. Goſſips? ſlighe 

What Goflips, Sir? 245 Stath. What Goſſips are we? ſpeak; 
Seat h. Te tell yon ſince you'd know: my wife and you, 

Shrill As Holland, have two tongues, that when 

Th'are in conjunction, are buſier, and make 

More noiſe than country faires; and atter more tales 

Than blind-folkes, Midwives, Nurſes. Then no ſhow 

Though *c be a Jugler ſcapes you. You did follow 

The Elephant ſo long, and King of Sweden, 

That people at laſt came in to ſee you. Then 

My Son could not be made a F:/5, but who 

Should I finde there much rakeo with the ſight 

But you two? I may now build Hoſpitals, 

Or give my mony to Plantations. Exit Seath. 
Ms Seath. Lets follow him, come 24s Scruple. 745 Holl. Juſt 

As your Sue left her Schoole-miſtreſſe, my Pes 

Left me Mi Scru. They'l come againe I warrant you; 

Extunt. 
Sc EN. II. 


Plot well. Aurelia, 


Pletw. 8 tis ſo pro jected, therefore make | 
No more demurres, the life of both our fortunes 
Lies io your carriage of things well; think therefore 


Whither 


1 nere 


The City Match. 43 
Whither you will ceſtore me, and advance 
Your own affaires, or elſe within this week 
Fly this your lodging, like uncuſtomd fingers, 
And have your Coach-horſescransformd to Rent, 
Have your apparell ſold for properties, 
And you returne to Cut- work. By this hand 
If you refuſe all this muſt bappen. Au, Well, Sir, 
Neceſſity which hath no Law, for once 
Shall make me oth' conſpiracy, and ſince 
VVe ate left wholly to our wits, Let's ſhow 
The power and vertue of em; if your Baneſwright 
Can but perſwade my Uacle, I will fit 
Him with a Bride. Plotw. The Scene is laid alreadyg 
I havetransformd an Engliſh Poet into 
A fine French Teacher, who ſhall joyne your hands 
VVith a moſt learned legend out of Rablar, 

Aur. But for my true groom who you ſay comes hither 
For a diſpuiſed Knight, I ſhall think I wed 
His Fathers Countiog-hoole, and go to bed 
Toſo much Ballion of a man, Faith I've 
No mind to him, brother, he hath not wit enough 
To make t a lawfull marriage. Plot. Y' are deceivd, 
Tle undertake by one weeks Tutoring, 
And catrying him to Plaies and Ordinaries, 
Engaging him io à quatrell or two, and making 
Some Captaine beat him, to render him a moſt 
Accompliſhe Gallant. Or ſay be be borne, ſiſter, 
Under the City planet, pray what wiſe Lad 
Deſires to match a wiſe Knight? you'd marry ſome 
Philoſopher now, that ſhould every night 
Lye with you ont of Ariſtotle, and looſe 
Your maiden. head by Demonſtration. 
Or ſome great ſtateſmav, before whom you muſt ſit 
As ſilent and referyd as if your looks 
Had plots on forreine Princes, and muſt viſit 


And 


44 The City Match. * 
Anddreſſeyour ſelfe by Tacitus, What he wants 
In Natarals, his fortunes will make up | 
In Honours, Pex; when hee s once made a Lord, TEX 
Who'l be ſo ſawcy as to think he can : | 
Be impotent in wiſdom? She chat marries ! 
A foole, is an Hermepbordite, the Man 488 
And wife too, ſiſter. Beſides tis now too late, 
He'l be here preſently, and comes prepar'd 1 
For Hymes, I took up a footman for him, | 
| And left him under three tyremens hands, beſides 
Two Bzrbers. Aur. Well, Sir I muſt then accept him 
With all his imperfections, ] have 
Procur'd a Sir Joh» yonder. Plotw. VYho iſt ? Aur · One 
'That preaches the next pariſh once a week Enter 4 
[ Aſleep for thirty pounds a yeare Foer- Here is Footman 
| A Knight deſires your Ladiſhip will give 
| Him audience. Aur. Tis no Knight Embaſſadour? 
Foot, He rather lookes like a Knight oth' Sun. /. Tis He. 
Aur. Let him come in Plot. If you be coy now, Pen, Ex. Foot. 
You ſpoile all- ¶Aur. V Vell, Sir Ile be affable. ; 


g 
| ScExn a III 
| To them Timothy fantaſtically dreſt, and a Footman. 


Pletw. H Ere he comes. Tim. Sirrzh, wait me inthe Hall, 
And let your feet ſtim there; your ayre's not fit, 

To be endured by Ladies, P/o;w. VV bat quarrell with 

Your Footman, Sir? Tim. Hang him, he caſts a ſent 

That drownes my perfumes, and is ſtrovg enough 

To cure the Mother or Palſie, Doe 1 aRt 

A Knight well? Plotw. This imperiovſneſſe becomes you 

Like a Knight newly dubd, Sir. Tim. V Vhat ſaies the Lady? 
Pl.tw, Speak lower, I've prepar'd her, ſhow your ſelfe N 


— 


The Cit) Match; 1 
A Courtier now ſhe's yours. Tim. If that be all. 


1˙e Court her, as if ſome Courtiet bad begot me 


Ih' Gallery ata Maſque, Plow, Madam. this Gentleman 
Defires to kiſſe your hands. Tim. And lips too Lady. 

Aar. Sir, you much honour both. Tim. I, I know that, 
Elſe Ide not kiſſe you. Yeſterday ] was 
In company with Ladies, and they all 
Long'd to be toucht by me, «Fr. You cannot cure 
The E vill, Sir, nor have your lips the vertue 
To reſtore roines, or make old Ladies young ? 

Tim. Faith all the vertue that they have, is that 
My lips are knighted. J am borne, ſweet Lady, 

To a poore fortune that will keep my ſelfe, 

And Foot-man, 8s you ſee, to beate my ſword 

In C uerpo aſtet meʒ l can at Court, 

If ] would ſhow my gilt ith* Preſence, look 

Afcer the rate of ſome five thonſands 

Yearely in old rents, and were my Father once 
Well wrapt ia ſeare-clotb, I could fine for Sheriffe; 

Pletw. Heart,you ſpoile all. Tim. VVhy? Plot. She verily 
Y'had nere a father. Aur. Lives your father, then Sir; (believd 
That Gentleman told me he was dead. Tin. 7is true, 

I bad forgot my felfe, be was drownd, Lady, 
This morning, as he went to take poſſeſsion 
Of a ſummer houſe and land in the ¶ anaries. 

Plotw. Now y have recoverd all. Tim. D' you think 1 hart 
Not wit enough to lye? Plow, Break your minde to her, 
She does expect it. Tim. But Lady this is not 
The buſineſſe which ] came for. Aar. I'me at leiſure 
To heate your buſioeſſe, Sir, Plat. Mark that, Tim. Indeed, 
Sweet Lady, I've a motion which was once l 
Or twice this morning in my mouth, and then 
Slipt back agairfe for feare, Aar. Cowards nere won 
Ladies, or Forts, Sir. Tim. Say then 1 ſhould feele 
Same motions, Lady, of affetion; might T5 

- D | 


40 The City Match; 
A man repaire Pauli with your beart,or put it 
Jnto a Tinder-box? Aar. How meane you, Sir? 

Tim. Why is your heart a ſtone, or fliot? Aur. Be plain, Sir 
I underſtand you not, Tim. Not underſtand me? 9 
Y' are the firſt Lady that ere put a man 
To ſpeak plaine Engliſh; ſome would underſtand 
Riddles, and (ignes; ſay ] ſhould love you, Lady? 

Aur. There ſhould be no love loſt, Sir. Tim Say you ſo? 
Then by this aire my teeth eene water at you; 8 
I long to have ſome Off. ſpring by you; we 
Shall have an excellent breed of wits; J meant 
My youngeſt ſonne ſhall be a Poet; and 
My Dzvughters, like their Mother, every one 
A wench oth' game. And for my eldeſt ſonne, . 
He ſhall be like me, and inherit, Therefore 
Lets not deferre our joyes, bat goe to bed 
And multiply. Aur. Soft, Sir, the Prieſt muſt firſt 
D-ſcharge his office.I doe not mean to marry Enter Dore a ani 
Like Ladies io New England,where they couple of ber Puritan 


With no more ceremony then birds chooſe their Mate dreſſe. 


Upon St Valentines day. Dor. Madam the Preacher 

1s ſent for to a Chorchiog, and doth acke 

If you be ready, he ſhall looſe, he ſaies, 

His Chryſomeelſe. Aur. O miracle! out of 

Your litle Ruffe, Dercas,and in the faſhion ? 

Doſt thou hope to be ſaved? Der. Pray Madam doe not + 

Abuſe me; ] will tell you more anon. ( take» 
Plotw- | ell him ſhees comming. Aur. Sir, pleaſe you pare 

Of a ſleight banquet? Pl. juſt as you are fate Exit Dorcas. 

T le ſteale the Prieſt in. rim. Doe. PI. When you are;joind, 

Be ſare you doe not overſee, but ſtraight 

Retire to bed, ſhel follow. Tim. Tis dot three 

A clock ith after noone · Plotw Tis but drawing 

Your Curtaines and you doe cteate vont vight. 

All times to Lovers and New married folke: ; 

May be made duke,7im.] will cheu, By cou Roome She's 


_ EEE —  ——_—... 


The City Match, a7 
She's a rare Lady,] doe almoſt wiſh | 
I could change ſex, and that ſhe might beget 
Children on me. Plot. Nay will you enter? Tim. Ladie, 
Pray will you ſhow the way. Plotw. Moſt Citie like, 
*Slid take ber by the arme, and lead her in. 
rim. Your arme ſweet Lady. Extunt. 
SCN A IV. 
Bri bs, Newcnt. 
Br, TT Ut are you fare th are they? New. Vie not believe 
B My ereacherous cies agaioe, but truſt ſome dog 
To guide me, if | did not ſee bis Uocle 
Comming this way, aud Beneſwright with him. Br. Who, 
The fellow that bring: Love to banes, and banes 
To bare thighes bout the rowne? New. The very ſame, Sir; 
The Citie * vpid that ſhoots artowes betwixt 
Partie and partie. All the difference is, 
He has his eyes, but they be brings together 
Sometimes doe not fee one another till (houſe 
They meet ith Church. Br. What ſay you now if Wert: 
Should ia diſpleaſure marry? New. Tis fo, this fellow 
In's company confirmes me- Tis che very buſineſſe 
Why Pla well has ſent for us. Jr. Here they come. 
Prithee lets ſtand and overheare em New. Stand cloſe then! 
SCEBNA. V. 
Enter Mars. bon ſe. Baneſwright. 
ahmed — Aurelia is her name Bas. Her fathet 
Was, Sir an Iriſh Bares, that undid 
Himſelfe by houſe · keeping. Mur. As for her birth 
I could wiſh it were meaner. As many Knights 
And Joſtices of peace as have been f 


—_ — 


” an 


Makes her doe pennance; and ſhe mainaings tbe Law 


The City Match. 


Her Honour wrongd to match a man that hath 

No Scuicheons but them of his Company, 

Which once a yeare do ſerve to trim a Lighter 

To W:ſtminfter and back againe- Ban. You ure 

Miſtaken, Sir · This Lady as ſhe is 

Deſcended of a great houſe, fo ſhe hath 

No Dowrie but her Armies. She can briog only 

Some Libbard: beads, or ſtravge beaſts, which you knowe 

Being bot Beaſts,let them derive themſelves 

From CMonſterrin the Glebe , nnd lineally 

Proceed from Hercules labours, they will never 

Advance her to a husband equall to 

Her ſelfe in birth, that can give Beaſts too. She 

Aimes only to match one that can maintaine 

Her ſome way to her ſtate. She is poſſeſt 

What ſtreames of gold you flow in. Sir Ware- h. But can ſhe 

Affedt my age? Baneſ. 1 askt her that; and told her 

You were about ſome threeſcore, Sr, and ren; 

But were as luſty as one of twenty, (or 

An aged Eunach) Ware · h. And what teplyed ſhee? Banſ.ſhee, 

Like a true Lucrece, anſwerd it was fie 

For them to Marry by the Church booke, who 

Came there to coole themſelves; But to a Mind 

Chaſt and indued with vertue, age did curne 

Love into Revetence. Br. Oc Sr Reverence, 
New. Prythe obſerve. #/ar6-b. Is ſhe ſo vettuous then? 
Baneſ. ' Tis all the fault ſhee has,ſhe will out · pray 

A Preacher at St Antlins ; nnd divides 

Theday in exerciſe; I did commend 

A great Preciſian to her for her woman, 

Who tells me that her Lady makes her quilt 

Mer ſmocks before for kneeling, #ere-b Excellent Creature! 
Baneſ. Then. Sir, ſhe is modeſt. #are-h. Too. Bane), 

Obſcene word ſhames her, a laſcivious Figure (The leaſt 


Which 


The City Match. 


Which forbids fornication, doth extend ; 
To kiſeing too. Mare · h. I thinke the time an age 
Till the ſolemnity be paſt, Bexeſ. I have 
Prepared her, Sr, and have ſo ſet you out! 
Beſides, | told her how you bad caſt 'of 

Your Nephew, and to leave no doubt that you 
Would ere be reconciled, before ſhe went 

To Church would ſettle your eſtate on her, 
„And oo the Heyres of ber begotten; Ware · h. To make all ſare; 
VVel call opon my Lawyer by the way, 

And take him with us. Baxeſ. you muſt be married, Sr, 

At the Frexcb Church, ] have beſpoke the Prieſt; 

One that will joyne you i'th right Geneva for me, 

Without a licence. #re-b- But may a man 

Wed in a ſtrange tongue? Bane/. I have brought together 
Some in Italian, Sr, the Langnage doth 

Not change the ſubſtance of the Match; you know 

No licence will be granted, all the Offices 

Are before- hand bribed by your Nephew, Wart-h. Well, 
Lets to the Lady ſtraight, to aroſſe him, 1 

Would marry an Arabian, and be at charge 

To keepe one co interpret, or be married 

In China Language, or the tongue, thats ſpoke Exit Ware. 
By the great Cham. Br. Now Newcnt, you preceive and Bane. 
My divioation's true, this fellow did : 
Portend a wedding. New- Plague oth Prognoſtication. 
Whod thinke that Madam were the Partye? Zr, Oh Sr, 
Shee!l call this wit ro wed his baggs, and lye 

With ſome Platonick ſervant. New: What if we 

Before we goe to Pletwell, went to her | 

Aud ſtrived to diſſwade her? Br. Lets make haſt 

They'l be before us elſe. Extunt. 


7 


ScENA. 


a 


19 be City Match; 
SCENA. VI, 


Enter Timothy unbuttoning bimſelfe, Aurelia 
| Pletwell, Dorcas. Foot. man. 


Since we ate coupled, I ſhall thinke the Prieft 
Has done all, as long as Fme a Virgin, 

Aar. Will you not ſtay till night, Sir? Tim. Night? No faith, 
Tee ſworne to get my firſt child by day, you may 
Be quick by night. Pl. Madam, your Knight ſpeaks reaſon. 

Tim. I will both ſpeak and do it, Awr. Well Sir,fioce 
There is no remedy, your beds prepared; 

By that time you are layed Vie come, Mezne time 
We pray that Gentleman to conduct you, There's 
My Footman to pluck off your ſtockens. Plorw, Come Sir. 

Tim. Sweet Lady ſtay not long. Pletw, lle promiſe for ber, 

Dor- Faith I admire your temperance to let Ex. Tim. Pl. 
Your Bride-groome go to bed & you not follow. & Feotwan. 
Were Tin your caſe 1 ſhould ha gooe firſt, 

And warmd his place. Aar. Well wench but that thou haſt 
Reveald thy ſelfe unto me, I de admire 
To heare a Saint talke thus. To one that knowes not 
The Myſtery of thy ſtrange converſion, Thou 
Wouldſt ſeeme a Legend, Der. Faith I have told you all, 
Both why I left my School-Miſtreſſe, who taught me 
Toconfate Curling · Icons, and why I put 
My ſelſe on this adventure, Aur. Well wench my brother 
Has had his plots on me, and Ile contribute 
My help to worke thy honeſt Ones on him. 
Do bot performe thy taske well and thou winnꝰſt him- 

Der, Let me alone; never was man ſo fitted Enter Footman. 
With a cheſt Bride, as I will fit his Uacle. Exit. 

Foot. Madam your Knight doth call moſt fiercely for you. 

Aur. prithee, go tell him ſome buſiceſle keeps me yet, 

And bid him tay himſelſe with this kiſſe. 


Tim. B this hand Lady you ſhall not deny me: 


SCENA 


| 


The City Match; Ir 
Sc ENA. VII. 


As they Eſſe 
Ester to them Bright. Newcmt. 


Br: BY your leave Madam, what for pradtiſe ſake 
Kiſſing your woman? Lord how a Ladies lips 

Hate /dleneſſe, and will be buſied, when 
The reſt lies fallow, And ratber then want action 
Be king within themſelves, an't be t enjoy, 
Bat the poor pleaſure of contemplation! 

New. And bow do you find ber Madam? Aur. Stay wench. 
Does it not grieve you now, and make you ſigb, (New. Lord, 

Aud very paſſionately accuſe Nature, 

And ſay ſhe was too hard to make your woman 
Able to kiſſe you only and do no more? 

Br, Is it not pittie, but beſides the gift 


Of making Cawdles, and uſing of her Pencil, 


She had the trick oth* other ſexe? Au · Me thinks 

Your owa good breeding might ioſtruct you that 

My houſe is not a new Foundation, where 

You might, paying the rate, »pproach, be rude, 

Give freedome to your unwaſht Mogihes. Der- My Lady 


, Keeps no poor N that ſin for victuals, for you, 


With whom this dead vacation you may trade 

For old ſilłke ſtockins and balfe ſhirts. They ſay 

You do offend och ſcore, aud fin in chalke, 

And the dombe walls complaine you are behind 

In penſion; ſo that your diſtreſſed Veſtalls, 

Are faine to foot theit ſtockins, pay the Brewer, 

And Land. Lords-rent in man kind, and long 

More earneſtly for the Terme then Norfo/ke Lawers. 
Br. Why you have got a ſecond, Lady: your woman 

48 =. ow 


—— 


i 
ad been bisdotie, Aar, Tou meane his Nephew 


The city Match, 


* . | 
B oh ſpeak good Countrie languzge, New. Offers at wit; 


And ſhewes teeth for a jeſt.” By, V Ve beare you are 
Tomarrie an old Citi zen · Aur. Then ſurelie 

You were not deafe. New. And do you mean his age, 
Which bath ſeen all the Kingdome boried thrice, 

To whomethe heat of Auguſt is December; Ex. Dorcas, 
VVbo, were he but in /za/y would ſave 

The charge of Marble vaults; and coole the dire 4 
Better then vrnti duct, ſhall freeze between 
Your melting armes? Do bat conſider, he 
But marries you #8 he would do bis furtes, = 
To keep him warme. Ar. But he is rich, Sit: Bi. Then, 
Ia wedding bim you wed mote infirmit ieee 
Then ever Gal» wrot of; He has paines { 
That put the Doctors to new experiments, ' 1 i. + ff 
Halfe bis diſeaſes io the Citie bill | u 2744 lh 
Kill hundreds werklie. A lone Hoſpital 

V Vere but enough for him. New. Beſides, - 7 
He has a covgh that oightlie drownes the Brfl many 

Calls up his Familie; all his neighbours riſe 
And go by it; as by the Chimes and (lock, 

Not fowre loame walls, nor ſaw duſt put between, 

Can dead it. Aur. Let he is ſtill rich, Br. If this 

Cannot affcighe you, but that you will needs . 
Be bjiad to wholfome counſell, and will marrie * 
One who by th coutſe of Nature ought t' have been 6 
Rotten before the Queens time, and in Iuſtice 

Should now have been ſome threeſcore. yeares 3 Ghoſt, 

Let pittie move you; Ia this Match you quite 

Deſtroie the hopes and fortunes of a Gentleman, 

For whom had his penurioo Uncle ſtarv'd 

And pin'd himſelfe bis whole life, to encreaſe Mid 
The riches he deſerves'c ioberit it (Plojwels; 


A prodigall young man; one whom the good 


ThiCity Mato © BY. 


Old man his Uncle kept to th? Inos of Court, 

And would in time he made him Berrefter; 

And raisd him to his fattin Cap, and Big gon, 

Jn which he might ha ſold his breath fat dearer, 

And let bis tongue out at a greater price, 

Then ſome theit Manno. But be did negledtt 
Theſe thriving mennes, followed his looſe companions, 
His Bright, and Newewrs; two, they ſay, that live 

By the new Hereſie P/aronickh Love. 

Can take np ſilks upon theit ſtrengths, and pay 


Tbeir Mercer with an In faut. Br, Newcnt! New. I, 


Ido obſerve her Chatactet; well then | 

You are reſolvd to marrie? Aar. Were the Man 

A ſtate, ſo it were a golden one. 

Ide have him. B,. Pray.then take along to Church 

Theſe few good wiſhes. May your husband prove 

So jealous to ſuſpeR that when you dtinke 

To anie man, you kiſſe the place where his 

Lips were before, and ſo pledge meetings. Let him 

Think you do Cuckold him by looks; and let him 

Eich night, before you go to reſt, adminiſter 

A ſolemoe oath, that all your thoughts were chaſt 

That day, and that you ſleep with all your baires. 
New. And which is worſe, let him forget he lay 


Wich you himſelfe, before ſome Magiſtrate 


Sweare twas ſome other, and have ic believd 
Upon Record. Pl. Siſter Ive left your Bridegroome, 
Under this key lockt in, t*imbrace your pillow. Enter 
Sure he has eat Eringees,be's as hot Plot. 
He was about to fetch you in his ſhirt. 
Br. Hows this? his ſiſter? New. I conceive not this. 
Pl. My Noble friends, you wonder now to heart 
Me call her ſiſter. By. Faith, Sir, we wonder more 
She ſhould be married? New. Ift be your ſiſter, we * 
[ ve 


A 
n- 


354 " TheCity Match; 


IH IH i Beta •P 


_ 


Have labourd her ſhe ſhould oor match her Uncle, 
And bring forth Riddles,Children that ſhonid be 
Nephewes to their Father, and to their Uacle ſonnes] 
Pla. I laugh now at your ignorance;why theſe 
Are ptojects, Gentlemen ſine ginns, and projects. 
Did Roſeclap boy come to you? By. Yes, PI have 
A rare ſcene for you. New The boy told as you were 
Upon a ſtratagem. Pletw. I ve ſeat for Roſeclap, 
And Captaine Qz«rrfield to be here. I have 
Par Salcwir into orders, be's inducted 
Into the French Church;yoo muſt all have parts; 
B-.Pcithee ſpeak out of Clowds, Pl. By this good light 
Twere Juſtice vow to let you both die ſimple, 
For leaving us ſo ſcurvily. New. We were », 
Sent for in haſt by th' Benchey,,to contribute 
To one of dem thats Reader. Plorw. Come with me, 
Yle tell you then, Bat firſt F le ſhow you a ſight 
Mach ſtranger then the F:/6, Dor. Madam, heres Bawſwright 
And an old Merchant doe deſire acceſſe. Enter Dorcas. 
Aur. Bid em come in. i. Gentlemen, fall off, Ex. Dort 
If we be ſeene the plot is ſpoild. Siſter, 
Now looke you doe your part well. Aar. I am perfect. 
Exis Plot. Bright, Newcot. 


SC BNA VIII. 


To Her Baneſwright Ware houſe» Dorcas. 


Baneſ. Mer this is the Gentleman I mention'd, 
Y've brought him here, according to my function 

To give you bot h an enterview; if you | 

Be teady, the Church and Prieſt ire. Aux. Is this, Sir, 

The wealthy Merchant? Ban-, Nada m, this is He 


Thar 


i... 


The City Match. 55 
That if you'l weare the price of Baronies, 
Or live at {leopatrs's rate can keepe you. | 
Anr. Come you a Snitor, Sir, to me?/Vare-b, Yes Lady, 
I did imploy my ſpeaker there, who bath 
1 hope inform'd you with my purpoſe. A»r.Surely, 
Your ſpeaker then hath err d; I underſtood 
Him for my woman, if you can like her, Sir, 
I: being for ought I heare, all one to you, 
I've woo'd her for you. But for my ſelfe,could yon 
Endow me with the ſtrea me that ebbs and flowes 
In waves of gold, / hope you doe not think 
Ide ſo much ſtaine my birth as to be bought 
To match into a Company. Sir,plainly, 


Te matchtalready. Vers · b. Baveſwright, did not you 


Tell me ſhe'd have me? Ba · Faith, Sir, I have cares 
That might deceive me, but I did dreame waking 

If ſhe were not the party. Madam, pray you 

One word in private. Axr.1'le prevent you; tis true, 
My Brother laid the Scene for me, but ſince 


W bave changd the plot, and tis contrivd, my woman 


Shall undertake my part. Ban. Iam inſtructed. 
I was miſtaken, Sir, indeed the Lady 

Spoke to me for her Genr/eWwormwan. How 

Doe you affect ber, Sir, you ſee ſhe is 

As hand ſome as her Ladie, and ber birth 


Not being ſo high ſhe will more ſi ze with you. 


VVare-b, I ſay, like ber beſt. Her Ladie has 
Too much great houſe in her- Ban. Tis right; this you 
May governe as you liſt. le motion t: Ladie, 
Pray pardon our miſtake,indeed out Errand 
Was chiefly co your Gentlewoman, Hur. Sit, 
She's one whoſe fortune I ſo much intend, 
And yours, Sir, are ſo faire that though there be 
Mach diſproportion in your age, yet] 
Will over. ruſe her, and ſhe ſhall referre 1 
er 


—ä ——2— 


Ile beare zpart in the ſoiemaity. 


The City Match;.” 


Her ſelfe tobe diſpoſed by me. Ware-hb.You much 
Oblige me, Madam.eAvr. Dorcas, this is the Merchant 
I have provided for you, he is old, | | 
Bat he has that will make him young, much Gold- 

Dor. Madam, but that I ſnould offend againſt 
Your care as well as my ptefetment, Ide | 
Have more experience of the Man, l mene * 
To make my husband. At ficſt ſight to marry, 
Maſt argue me of lightneſſe. Ay. Princes, Dorc as, 
Doe Wooe by pictures, and Ambaſſadoars, | 
And match in abſeat Ceremonies, Dor. Bat org 
You look for ſome great portion, dir. YVare-b. Faire Miſtteſſe, 
Your vertues are to me a wealthy Dowry. 228922 1 


And if you love me I ſhall think you bring 


More then the lad. Dor. But, Sir,'t may be 

You'l be againſt my courſe of life, I love 

Retirement, muſt have times for my Devotion, 

Aq litle us d to company, and hate 

The vanity of viſits. YFarc-b. This makes me 

Love you the more. Dor. Then | ſhall never truſt you 

To goe to ſea, and leave me;[;(hall dreame | 

Of nought but ſtormes,and Pytats. Every winde 

Will break my (leep.#ar-[le ſtay at home · Dore. Sit, thete 

Is one thing more;I beate you have a Nephew, 

You meane to make your Heyte. I hope you will 

Settle ſome Joynture on me. War · b. He's ſo loſt 

1n my intents that to revenge my ſelfe, 

Itake this courſe. Bat to temove your doubts, 

I've brought my Lawyer with blank deeds, 

He ſhall put in your Name, and l, befote 

We goe to Church weel ſeale em · Derc. On theſe termes 

Where is your Pcieff, Sir? War. He expeRs me at 

The French Church, Miſtreſſe. Aar. Come,when you have 
(ſeald, Sir, 

Extunt. 

Acrus 


e, 


The City Match, 


Acrus V. Sczna IL 


Plotwell. Aurelia. Bright. Neucut. Quartficld.Salewit 
Roſeclap. two Footmen, Cypher, 


T. VV Ell Siſter, by this hand 7 was afraid 
| You had marr'd all; but / am well content 
You have outracht me. If ſhedo act it wellnow, 
By Fove Þ'le have ber, Aur. She bath ſtudied all 
Her Cues already. Plotw. Gentlemen, how doe 
You like the projeR? Br. Theirs was dull and cold 
Compared to ours. New. Some Pert will ſteale from us 
And bring't into a Comœdy. Querrf.The jeſt 
Will more inſpire then ſack. P/o:Ww,I have got Cypher 
Over to our fide too;He bas beene vp and downe Ester Salew: 
Jo invite Gueſts to th' wedding. How now Sale wit like 4 ( ura 
Are they gone home? Salew. Yes faith, for bettet for worſe; 
I've rexd a Fiction out of Rab/aies to em, 
In a religious tone, which he believes 
For good French Liturgie. When I bad done 
There came a Chriſtniog. Plow. And didſt thou bapti ze 
Out of thy Rablaies too? Salew, No faith, left em 
lo expeQation of their Paſtor, Br. Newcut, 
VVho does he looke like in that dreſſe? New. Hum? why 


Like 3 Geneva ver, in black, who left 

The Zoom and entred into tht Miniſtery 

For conſcience ſake. Plot. Well Gentlemen you all 
Doe know your parts, you Captaine, and Baxeſwright 
Goe get your properties. For you two,Theie 

Two Mule: ſhall carry you in greater ſtate, 

And more eaie then the Fiſtala. Tou ſiſter 

Well leave unto your Knighr,to come anon. 


Roſe- 


_— * U 


58 The City Match; 

Roſeclapand I will thither ſtraight. You Cypher 

Know what you have to doe? Sal. And as for me 

I me an invited Gueſt, and am to bleſſe 

The Yexiſon in French ot in a Grace 

Of broken Engliſs, Quart f. Before we doe divide 

Oar Army, let us dip our Roſemaries 

In one rich bowle of ſack to this brave gitle, 

And to the Gentleman that was my Fiſßb. 

All. Agreed, Agreed. Plat. Captaine you ſhall dip firſt. 
E xennt- 


SCEN A II. 
Warehouſe, Dorcas» 


y deareſt Dorcas,welcome. Here you ſee 
The honſe you muſt be miſtreſſe of, which with 
This kiſſe 1 doe confirme goto you- Der. Forbeare,Sir. 
mare · b. How wife, refuſe to kiſſe me? Dor. Yes, unleſſe 
A ſweeter ayre came from you; y have turnd my ſtomack. 
] wonder you can be ſo rude to aske me, 
Knowing your Lungs are petiſnt. Ware · h. This is rare 
That I ſhould live to this great age, aod never 
Till now know I was rorten! Dor. I ſhall never 
Endure your Converſation; / hope you have | 
Contriv'd two Beds,two Chambers, and two Tables; 
Ic is an Article that I ſhould live, 
Retir'd,that is, a part. arch. But pray you wife 
Are you in earneſt. Der. D' you think Iſe jeſt with age? 
War. Will you not lie with me then? Der. Did ever Man 


Of your haires usk ſach queſtions?/ doe bluſh 


At your uoreaſonableneſſe, War. Nay then. 


Dor-Iſt fit I ſhould be buried? Wars · h. / reach you not: "gu 
Due 


The City Match, 59 
Der. VVhy to lie with you were a direct Zmblew 
of going to my grave. Wareb. I underſtand you, 
Dor. [le have your picture ſet in my wedding ring 
For a Deaths heai arch. 1 do conceive you. Der. Tde 
Rather lie with an ancient 7owbe, or embrace | 
An Anceſtor then you. D' you think le come 
Between your winding ſheets? For what? to heare you 
Depart all night, and fetch your laſt groane? and 
Ih morning find u Deloge on the floore, 
Your Entrailes floating, and balte my husband ſpit 
Upon the Arras? Ware. I am married-— Der. Then; 
For your abilities, ſhould twelve good women 
Sit on theſe revetend locks, and on your heat, 
And natarall appetite, they would juſt find you 
As youtbfull as a Coffin, and us hot 
As tit ſultrie winter that froze ore the Thames; 
They lay the bard time did begin from you. 
Woareh. Good, I am made the carſe of # atermes. 
Dor. Vout hamors come froſt from yoo, and your noſe 
Hath yſicles in Ia War. Aſſiſt me patience: 
VVhy heare you miſtteſſe, you that have a feaver, 
And Dog daies in your bloud, if you knew this 
VVhy did you marrie me? Dory. Hs, ha, hs, ar. She laughs! 
Der. That your experienced ache, that bath felt ſprigs 
And falls this fortie yeares, ſnould be ſo dull 
To think [have not them that ſhall ſupply 
Your cold defeats. Var. You bave your ſervants then? 
And am forkt: hum? Der. Do you think 
A woman young bigh in her bloud=-—. Var. And hot 
As Goats, or Marmoſite.—— Dor. Apt to take flame at 
Everie temptation——, Var. And to kindle at 
The pictare of a Man——. Dor. VVou ld wed doſt a ſhes, 
A Monument, unle ſſe ſhe were=— Var. Crackt, tried, 
Aud broken up Dor. Right, Sir, or lackt a Cloke? | 
| Far. 


A 
* ———— — 


60 | The City Match! 


VVar. Miſchiefe and Hell, and was there none to make © 
Your cloke but I! Dor. Not ſo well lin d. VVar. O yon 
Sraid for a wealthie Cuckold, your tame beaſt 
Maſt have his guilded hornes. Der. Tes, Sir; Beſides 
Tour age being impotent, you would I knew 
In conſcience winke at my ſtolne helps, if I 
Took comfort from abroad. War. Yes, yes, yes, yes, 

Yoa ſhall be comforted, I will maiataine 

A Stallion for you» Dor. I will have friends come to me 
So you'l conceale. War. Alas, Ile be your Pander; 
Deliver letters for you, and keep the door. | 

Dor. Ile have a woman ſhall do that. Y/Yar. Oimpudence! 
Unheard of impudence! Dor. Then, Sir, Ile look 
Tour Coffers ſhall maintaine me at my rate. 

Var. Hows that? Der. VVhy like a Ladie; for Ido mean 
To have you Koighted, VVar. I ſhall riſe to honour. 

Dor. D'you thirk Ile have your Faftor move before me, 
Like a Device ſtitt'd by a wier, or like | 
Some grave Clock wound up to a regular pace? 

Var. No, you ſhall have your Uſher, Dame, to ſtalk 
Before you like a buskind Prologue, in 
A ſtrely, high, msjeſtick motion, bare. 

Dor. Ido expect it; yes, Sir, and my Coach, 
Six horſes, and Poſtilion; four are fit 
For them that have a charge of Children; yon 
And I ſhill never have anie. YYar, If we have, 
All cM:ddle/ex is Father. Dor. Then lle have 
My Footman to tun by me when viſit, 
Ot take the aire ſometimes in Hide par. VVar. You, 
Beſides being chaſt, are good at Races roo? 
Von can be a Fockey for a need? Dor. Tate pleaſant, Sir. 

V Var. VVhy bark you, hark you, Miſtteſſe, you told me 

Tou lovd retirement, loved not viſits, and bargaind 


I ſhould not carry you abroad. Dor You?no; 4 


The City Match, 


Iſt fic 1 ſhonld be ſeen at vort with you? 

Such an odde (ſight as you, would make the Ladies 
Have melancholy thoughts. #are-b.Yoa bound me too 

I ſhould not goe to Sea, you loy'd me ſo. , 

You could not be without me. Dor. Not if you ſtaid 
Above a yearez for ſhonld 7, in a long voyage, 

Prove fruitfull, | ſhoald want a father to 

The Infant. War. Moſt politiquely kinde, 

And like a Whore perfect ith* myſtery, 

It is bey ond my ſufferance. Der. Pray, Sir, vex, 

Ile in, and ſee your Jewels, and make choice 

Of ſome for every day,and ſome to weare Exit. 
At Maiqgues. Var. Tis very good. Two daies 

Of this / ſhall gro mad, or, to redeeme 

My ſelſe, commit ſome outrage ·· O. O- O. 


SGW N 4 III. 
Te him Plotwell, and Roſeelap. 


Plotw. Il. I am ſorry ſuch a light offence 
Shovid make ſachdeep impreſſions ia you;Bat that 

Which more afflicts me then the loſſe of my 

Great hopes, is, that y are likely to be abuſed, Sir, 

Strangely abus'd,Sir, by one Baneſwright,) heate 

You are to marry. Var. Did you heare ſo? ; 
Plotw, Madam Aurelis's woman, Var. What of her, Sir? 
Platw» Why, Sir, I thought it doty to informe you, 

That you were better match a ruind Band; 

One ten times cured by ſweating and the Tab, 

Or paind now with ber fiftieth Ach, whom not 

The power of Uſquebavgh,or heat of feavers 

Quickens enovgh to with;one of ſuch looks, 

Thar Judges of n proofe, 


— 


snſped, 


62 The City Match; 

SuſpeR,arrajgne, and burn for witcheraft. . VVhy pray? 
P/o:w.For ſhe being paſt all motions, impotence 

Will be a kinde of Chaſtity, and you 

Might ha ve ber to your ſelfe, dut bere is one 

Kuowes this to be War. Anu arrant whore: Raſ. I ſee 

You have heard of ber, Sir; Iodeed ſhe bas (Yes, Sir, 

Done pennance thrice- War. How ſay you, peonance ? Rc. 

And ſhould have ſufferd.- War. Carting, ſnould ſhe not? 
Rel. The Mar ſball had her, Sir. PYay. I ſweat, I ſweat. 
Roſ. She's of kao practice, Sir, the clothes ſhe weares 

Ate but ber quarters ſinnes,ſhe has no linnen 

But what ſhe firſt offends for · Me. O bleſt Heaven 

Look downe upon me. Pla. Nay, Sir, which is more, 


She has three children living, bas bad ſoure. (Sir, 


War. Hom? Children? Children fay you? Pletw. Aske him 
One by a French. Man Roſ. Another by a Dutch. | 

Plotw. A third, Sit, by a Moore, borne of two colours, g 
Jaſt like a Sergeant. Man. War. VVhy ſhe has knowne then 
All Tongues and N ations: Roſ. She has beene laine with far- 


Then ever Ceryat travaild,and laine in (cher 


By two parts of the Map, Afrique, and Europe. 
As if the State maintaind her to allay 
The heat of Forrainers, VVar. O-O-O-O, 
Plitw.V Vbat aile you, Sir? N ν b. O Nephew I am not well, 
IJ am not well. Plot. l hope you are not married. 
VVar.Itistoo true · Roſ. God help yon then. VVar. h Amen; 
Nephew forgive me. Roſ. Alas good Gentleman. (in bell 
Plotw. VVould you traſt Baneſwright, Sit? VVar#h.Nephery 
There's not a torment for him; O that I could 
But fee that cheating Rogue upon the rack now: 
Ide give a thouſand pound for every ſtretch, 
That ſhould enlarge the Rogue through all his joints, We 
And but juſt ſhow him bel), and then recall 
His broking ſoule, ind give bim ſtrength ro ſuffer 
His torture often; | would have the Raſcal Thiok 


o_— cv 


The City Match, 


Thiok hanging a reliefe,and be us long 
A dying as a chopt Eele, that the Divell 
Might have his ſoule by peeces,who's bere?a Saylor? 

Enter ( yphay liks a Sajler. 


SCENA IV. 
To them Cypher, 


22 . rich Merchant / Var. Sir; 
My name is Ware - houſe. Cy. Then you are not, Sir, 


] So rich by two ſhips as you were. Var. How meane you? 


Cyph- Your two ſhips, Sit. that were now comming home 
From Ormw are both caſt away;the wrack 
And burden on the place was valued at 


| Some forty thouſand pound. All the men periſht, 
| By th' violence of the ſtorme, only my ſelfe 


Preferv'd my life by ſwimming, till a ſhip 
Of Briſtoll tooke me up, and brought me home 
To be the ſad reporter · Warb. Was nothing ſay'd? 
Cyph.T wo ſmall Caskes;one of blew Figs, the other 
Of pickeld Ma/drowes; which ſervd me for bladders, 
And kept me up from fiokivg, Twas a ſtorme 
Which, Sir, 1 will deſcribe to you. The Windes 
Roſe of a ſadden with that tempeſtuous force—— 
War. Prithee no more; I have heard too much. Would I 
Had been ith' rempeſt. Cyph. Good your worſhip, give 
A poore ſea-fariog man your charitie, 
To carry me back againe,1'me come above 
A hundred mile to tell you this. War. Goeio, 
And let my Factor if he be come in, 
Reward thee, ſtay and ſap to. pb. Thank your Worſhip, 
War. Why ſhould I not now hang my ſ(etfe? Or if Ex. Cypb. 
It be a fate that will more hide it ſelfe, 
And keep me from diſcredit, tie ſome weight 
- HS About 


—— 


— — re 


* — 
— 


The City Match, 


. 
& 


Adout my neck, to ſink me to the bottome 


Ocb' Thames,notto be found, to keep my body, 
From riſing up and telling tales, Two wracks) 
And both worth forty thouſand pound there) why 
That landed here, were worth an hundred, 1 
VVi!l drowa my ſelfe; l nothing have to doe 
Now in this world but drown my ſelfe. Plorw.Fie theſe 
Are delperate reſolorions. Take heart, Sic, 
Thece may be wates yet to relieve you · V Var. How? 
Platw. VVhy for your loſt ſhips, ſay, Sir,| ſhould bring 
Two oth Aſſurance Office that ſnould warrant 
Their ſafe returie,tis not know ne yet. VVould you 
Give three ports to ſecure the fouitbi VV. Ide give 
Ten to ſecur: one. Plorw. VVell, Sir, and for your wife, 
Say | ſhould prove it were no lawfoll match? 
Aod that ſhe is another MantYoud take 
The peece of ſervice well. V Var. Tes, and repent, 
That when I bad ſo good an Heyre begot 
Unto my haod, 1 was ſoraſh to aime 
At one of my own dotage. Plot. Say no more, Sir, 
But keep the Sayler that be ſtir oor, Wee | Exit PlotW. 
About it ſtraight, War. How much 1 was deceiv'd & Reel. 
To think ill of my Nephew. In whole revenge 
I ſee the Heavens frowne on me; Seas and Winds 
Swell and rage for him againſt me. But J will 
Appeaſe their furies; and be reconciled, 


Ben K To 


To him Sta- thrift: Ms Sca- thriſt. Ms Holland. 
Ms Scruple. 


Ms _ Uh joy to you, Sir, you have made quick diſ- 
{ like a man that can love, wooe, and wed, (patch 
All ia au houre, my husband was ſo long 4 


——— 


Eren 


Py wy Ay Fo — „ „ 


ox 


The City Match, 


A getting me, ſo many friends conſents 
Were to be askr, that when we came to Church 
Twas not a Marriage, but our times were out, 
And we were there made free of one another, 
Ms Hal. I lookt to fiad you abed, and a young Sheriffe 
Begot by this. My husband, when I came | 
From Church, by this time bad bis Cawdle; I 
Had not a Garter left, nor he a point, 
Ms cru. Surely all that my husband did the firſt 
Night we were married, was to call for one 
Of his wrooghe Caps more, to allay bis Rheume. 


Ms Hoff, We heare y* have matcht a Courtier,Sir,a Gallant; 


One that can ſpriog fire io your Bloud,and dart 

Freſh flames into you. Ms Sea.Sir,you are not merry! 

Me thinks you doe not looke as you were married 
Ms Holi. You rather look as you had loſt your Love. 
Ms Sfera. Or, elſe as if your Spouſe Sir, had rebokt you. 
Sta. How is it, Sir? you ſee I have brought along 

My Fialers with me; my wife ane Ms Holland 

Are good winde laſttuments. Tis enough tor me 

To put on ſadueſſe. War. Yoo,Sir,bave no cauſe 
Seath, Not 1? wske Ms Scruple. i have loſt 

My Dauphter. Sir ſhe's ſtolne. Then, Sir, I have 

A ſpendthtift to my ſonne.Vareb. Theſe are felicities 

Compard to me. You bave not matcht a Whore,Sir, 

Nor loſt two ſhips at ſca. Sea. Nor you, l hope. 
VVar · Truth is you are my friends. I am abus'd, 

Gtoſſely fetcht over. I have matche a Srewes; 


The notedſt woman oth' Towne-Ms Seath. Indeed ] heard 
She was a ( hamber · maid. Ms Holl. And they by their place, 


Doe wait upon the Lady,but belong 

Uato the Lo- d. Sea. But is this tiue? V Var Here was 

My Nephew juſt now, and one Reſeclap, who tell me 

She has chreee Children living; one dapple grey, 

Halie Moore halſe E 3 as many men 
” FI 


OO TIS 


66 The City Match, 
Ai ſhe that ſinned by th Calendar, and divided (oeſſe! 


The nights oth/yeare with ſeverall men. Sea. Bleſſe me good · 
Var. Then like a man condemnd to all misfortunes, ; 

I have eſtated her in all I have. 
Sea. How? War. Under hand and ſcale, Sir, irrecoverably. 
Enter Sali wit. 


SG EN A. VI. 


To them Salis · wit. 
Ms Holl. 12 Ms Scruple here's your husband. Salem. Be 
The leare ofe the faire Compance, Ms Scrap. My 

His cold keeps him at home, Surely | take (Hausband? 
This to be ſome Dutch · Elder. Sal. VVhere is 
The Breed an Breed: groome?Oh, Monſirur, Ime com't 
To give you zhoy, and bleſſe your ( apònʒ wert 
Is your faire Breed? Ware-h.O Non ſieur, you have joynd me 
To a chaſt Virgin. V Vould when ] came to you 
Y* had uſed your Ceremenies about my Funeral], 

Sal. Foonerallt 1s your Breed dead War. VVould ſhe were 
de double your Fee, Monfiesr,to butie ber. 

Sal. Ee cin but leetle Engliſh. Mar. No, I ſee 
Tou are but new come over, Sal. Dover Tere 
Ee landed. ar. I, Sir, pray walk in; that doore 
VVill land you in my dining roome. Sal. Ee tank you, Exit, 

Mare. h. This is the Prieſt that married us. Sea. This is 
'A French-man iſt no u arch. Twas at the French ¶ hurcb. 


Sc EN A. VII. 


Enter to them two Foot men bearing the Frame 
' of @ great Pillure. Curtaines drawn. 
1 Foot. — down gently, ſo. 2. Foo. They make me ſweat, 
Picture: quoth you: ſlight they have weight enough 
To be the Parties. Foot · My Ladie, Sir, has ſent 
A preſent to your wife, War. What Lady pray? 


I Foot 


Foo eee KN HAOSO rp. 


Www AnH ASP PVrUlCOCD ern 


Ind 1.197 


re 


ts 


The City Match. 67 
I Foot. Madam Aarelia, Sir. ar. Oh= 2 Fore. Sit, they ate 
A brace of Pictures with which my Ladie prajes _ 
She will adorne her ( hamber. Ware. Male Piſtures pray, 
Ot Female? 1 Foot, Why d' you aske? VVarch. Becanſe me 
It ſhould be Mars and Venus in 2 Net, (thinks 
Aretines poſtares, or a oaked Nb, 
Lyiog aſleep, and ſome laſcivious Satyr 
Taking her lineaments. I heſe are pictures which 
Delight my wife. 2 Foe. Theſe are Night» pieces, Sir, 

Ms. Hall. Lord how I long to ſee em? I have at home 

The fineſt raviſht Zucruce! Ms. Scru. So have! 
The fineſt fall of Boby/on! There is 
A fat Monk ſpewing Charches; ſave your preſence. 
Ms, Hell. Pray will you open em. 1 Fot. My Lady charged us 
None ſhould have ſigbt of em, Sir, but your wife. 

V Var. Becauſe you make ſo daintie, I will ſee em. Drawes the 
2 F. Tis out of our Comiſſion. Var. But not of mine. Curtain 
Hell & damnation! 1 F. How d' you like em, Sic? Within are 
Ms. Hall. Look they are picturd ia their cloathes diſcovered 
Ms. Sea. They ſtir too- Bright and 
2 Foot. Sir, they are drawn to life; a ſafters Hand Newer. 
Went to em 1 aſſure you. War. Oat Varlets, Bawds, 
Panders, avoid my houſe. O Divell/ are you They come ont! 
My wives N5ght-pieces? Br. Sir, you are rude, uncivill, 

And would be besten. New. We cannot come in private - 
On buſineſſe to your wife, but you moſt be 
Inquiſitive, Sir? Thank God tis in your own houſe, 
I he place ptotects you. Br. If ſuch an Inſolence 
Scape unrevengd, henceforth no Ladis, ſhall Enter Dor 
Have ſecret ſervants. Now, Here ſhe comes, we'l ask 
If ſhe gave you Commiſſion to be fo bold, 
V Var: Why this is far beyond example rare- 
Now ] conceive what is P/atoxich Love, 
Tis to have men like Pictures brought diſguiſed, 
To Cuckold us with vertue. They whiſper? 
1 1 Foot, 


th 


68 whe City Match 


5 SCENA VIII. 


To tbem Dorcas· 


Der. LIE would not offer e would he? Br. We have been 
ln danger to be ſearcher; bereafter we 

Moſt fi ſt be queſtiond by an Officer, 

Aud nring it under hands we are no Men, 

Or have nought dangerous about us, before 

We ſhall obteine acceſſe. New. We do expect 

In time your Hasband to preſerve you chaft, 

Should keep you with a gard of Eci; or 

Coafine you, like Italians, to à roome 

Whete no male Feaſt is pictur d, leaſt the ſight 

Of ought that can beget, ſhould ſtir deſires. 
Dor. I mare, Sir, who did licenſe you to prie, 

Or ſpie out any friends that come to me; 

It ſhewes an unbred Carioſicie; 

Which Ile corre hereafter, you will date 

To bresk up Letters ſhortly, and eximine 

My Taylor, leaſt when he brings home my gowne 

here be a Man in't. 1'le have whom 1 lift, 

In what diſguiſe liſt, and when liſt, 

And not have your ſower eie: ſo ſawcie, to peep, 

As if vou by prevention meant to kill 

A Ba'blich. War. Miſtreſſe, do what you lift, 

Send foc your Couch out, lie with your Gallants there 

Be forte ys all, Or if you have a minde 

To fellowes that can lif. weights, I can call 

Two Footmex tod. Sea, You are too patient, Sir- 

Send for the Aarſball, and diſcharge your houſe- 

Ms 86a. Trulie a handſome woman, what vittie tis ; 
She is not honeſt? Ms Hof. Two proper Gen:lea en too. 
Lord that ſuch Pictures might by ſent to me. 


. 

14 
— 

Cl 

: 

$ | 
| 
1 / 
1. 


SCENA 


599998 IOC L TCL. .-- 


A By HZ Ot by 


Ne City tat. 89 


SCENA ULTIMA; 


Enter to then Plorwell and Roſeclap, With Baneſwright and 
Luartfield diſguiſed. 


War. O Nephew welcome to my ranſome; here 
My honſe is made a new EN; Gallants 
Are brought in varied formes, Had I not lookt 
By providence into that frame, Theſe two 
Had been conveighd for Night-pieces and Laneſkipe 
Into my chaſt B- ids chamber. Till now ſhe took 
And let her ſelfe out; now ſhe will be able 
To hire, and buy Offenders, Plot. / le eaſe you, Sir; 
VVeTwo have made a full diſcoverie of her. 
Ro/. She's marri'd to another man, Sit. ur. Good. 

Nephew thou art my bleſſed «Lnge/: who 
Are theſe two? Ploty. Two that will ſecute your Ships; 
Sent by the Office. Seale you, Sir, Th' have brooght 
Th A ſſuranes with em. nur. Nepbem thou wert born 
To be my deate preſerver. Plot». It is dotie, Sir, 
To help you out with your misfortunes. Gentlemen, They (ub: 
Produce your ?»ſtrwments. U icle put your ſeale, ſcrib, ſcali, c. 
And write your name here, they will do the like deliver inter- 
To the other parchment, So, now deliver, changeably, 

War. ] do deliver this as my Ad and Deed. 
Ban, Quart. And we this as our A and Deed. Pl. Pray Gen- 
Be witoeſle here. Upon a doubtfall Rumour (temen 
Of two Ships wrackt as they teturnd from Ormu, 
My Uncle Covenants to give thtee parts 
To have the fourth ſecured. Aod theſe two here 5 ea,Reſ. By,Ntw 
As Delegates of the Office, undertake ſalſcribe as wite 
Ai that rate to aſſure them. Uucle now reſſes, 
Call forth the Saylor, & ſend for the Prieſt Ent. Sale. & Cyph. 
That married you, War: Loox here they come · Plex. Firſt theo, 

- 


70 City Th. Mate 


Not to afflict you longer, Uncle, ſince 
We now are quit, know, all this was my project. 
war. How? Plot. Your two Ships are richlie landed: if 

Yau'l not believe me, beres the Saylor, who (ppb. andiſguiſcr; 
Transformd to Cypher, cantell you. Cyph. Tis verie true, Sit. 
I hired this travailiog caſe of one oth Sailors, 
That came in one of em. They lic at Black wal 
Ttoth I in pitty, Sit, to Mr Ploewel, 
Thought it my datie to deceive you. VV. Very well,Sir. 
VVhat are theſe Aaſquers too? Plat. Faith, Sit, theſe Ex.(yph. 
Can change their formes too. They are two friends they un- 
Worth threeſcore thouſand pound, Sir, to my ule, diſguiſe: 

VVar. Baneſwright, & Captain 2uarificld! Qu. Nay old boic 
Th haſt a good pennie-wortb om t. The jeſt is — 
Three parts of four, Ban. Faith, Sir, we hope you l paĩe 
T unnage aud Powndage into th bargaine. VVar. O 
You are a precious Regwe, you ha preferd me 
To a chaſt Luerece, Sirtab. Ban. Your Nepbew, Sir, 
Hath married her with all her faults, They are 
New come from ( hurch. V Ver. How? Pl. VVonder not, Sir, 


VVere married but in jeſt. Twas no ¶ hurch forme, (you 
| But a fine Legend out of Rablai⁸. Sal. Troth Salw. undiſ- 
This reverend weed caſt off, I'me a laie Post, guiſes. 


In the fife Add or ſo; and thats almoſt 

VVorne out of faſhion too. Ms Sea. Theſe are the two 

That ſhowd my ſon. Ms. Holl. Lets have our monie back. 
Plot w · Bat Uncle for the Joynture, you have made her, 

| I hope youl not tettact. That and three parts 

Of your two Ships, belides what you will leave 

Us at your death, will make a pretty ſtock 

| For young beginners: V Var. Am ] o'rereacht ſo finelie? 
Sea. Bat ate you married, Sir, ia earnell? Ples. Troth, 

VVe have not bꝛen abed yet, but may goe, 

And no Law broken. Ses. Then 1 muſt tell you, Sir, 


| And cannot matrie ualeſſ t be ina Play, 


Y' have 


ir, 


The City Match + | 71 
Y' have wronged me, and I look for ſatis faction: 

Plow. VVhy? I beſeech you, Sir. Sea. Sir, were not you 
Bethrotht once to my daughter? Ms Sash. And did not 1, 
And Ms Ho{and help to make you ture? 

Plot. I do confeſle it. Sea. Beate witneſſe, Gentlemen, 
He doth confeſſe it, Plot, Ile ſweare it too, Sir, See. V Vby 
Then have y ou matcht this woman? Plot. V Vhy? becauſe 
This is your Daughter, Sir, 1'me hers by Conqueſt, 

For this da ies ſervice, See» Iſt poſſible 1 ſhould 

Be out in my own child ſo? Mt Sea. Itold you husband. 
Ms Scrs. Surelis my ſpitit gave me it was ſhe, 

And yet to fee, now you bave not year Wore, 

Nor Citie Ruffe on, Miſtreſſe Sue, how theſe 

Cloathes do beguile. In truth I cook you for 

A Gentlewoman, Ses. Here be rare plots indeed. 

V Vhy how now, Sir, theſe young beads have outgone us. 

Was my Son oth plot too? Plaw. Faith, Sir, be 

Is married too; 1 did ſtrike up a wedding Ent Tim, A ur- 

Between him and my ſiſter, Pes. Look, sir, 

They come without their Maidenheads. See, Why this 

Is better ſtill. Now, Sir, you might have askt 

Conſent of Parents. 7im. Pray forgive me, Sir. 

1 thought I had matcht a Ladie, but ſhe proves - 

Sta. Mach better, Sir; Ide chide you 3s a Fi 
But that your choice pleads for you- Tim. Mother pray 
Salute my wife, and tell me if one may not 
Lie with her lips; oay you too, M. Holland; 

You taught her to make Shirt: and Boxelace; ſhe's 
Out of ber time vow, Ms Holl. I releaſe ber, Sir. 

War, I took your ſiſter for a Ladie, Nephew. 

Plot. I kept her like one, Sir, my Temple ſcores 
Went to maintaine the Title, out of hope 
To paine ſome great match for her, which you ſee 
Is come to paſſe. Var. Well, Mr. Seathrife, things 
Are jaſt fallen out as we contrivd'em; I 
Grieve 


72 TheCity Match, 


Grieve not I am deceived. Believe me, Gentlemen; 

You all did your parts well: ewas carried cleanly; 

And though I could take fome things ill of you 

Faire Miſtreſſe, yet twas plot. and I forget ir; 

Lets in and make em Portions. See. Lead the way, Sir: 
Bas. Pray ſtay a litle. War. More Revelations yet? 
Ban. I all this while have ſtood behind che Cortainez 

You have a brother, Sir, and you a father. 

Plot. If he do live, I have. Ban. He in his time 
Was held the wealthieſt Merchant on th Exchange, 
War. Tis true, but that his ſhipwracks broke him. Ban. And 
The debt for which he broke I bear you have Baneſwr.an- 

Copounded- Sea. Iam paid it. Ban. Them l thank you- diſguiſe, 
War, My brother Plotwell! Ban. Son I wiſh you joy. 


Plot. O my bleſt ſtartes my Father! Bax. Aud to you, faire . 
(Miſtreſſe, | 


Let it not breed repentance that I have, 
For my ſecutitie to ſcape your Father, 
A while'deſcended from my ſelfe to this 
Unworthie ſhape, Now I can caſt it off. 
And be my true ſelfe. I have a ſhip which fame 
Gave out for loſt but jſt now landed too, 
Worth twentie thouſand pounds towards your Match, 

Sea. Better and better ſtill, War. Well what was wanting 
Uato our joies and made theſe 7 wptials 
ImperfeR, Brother you by your diſcovetie Enter Cypher. 
Have fallie added. Cyph. Sir, The two Sheriff: are 
Wichin and have both bronghe their Wives. ar. The Feaſt 
Intended for my weddivg ſhall be yours. +. 
7. which 1 a4dr, may you ſo love, to ſay 
VV hen eld, your time was but one Marriage Day. 


FINIS.
