Canonical Title: THE COMMITTEE
Requested Title: THE COMMITTEE
Authors: Sir Robert Howard
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: sirroberthowards00howarich
Item Title: Sir Robert Howard's comedy, "The committee"
Item Creator: Howard, Robert, Sir, 1626-1698 ; Thurber, Carryl Nelson, b. 1886
Item Year: 1921
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE COMMITTEE
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/sirroberthowards00howarich/sirroberthowards00howarich_djvu.txt
"  Luttrell  Brief  Relation  (Sept.  6, 1698)  vol.  IV,  p.  423. 

"  Cambridge  History  of  English  Literature,  vol.  VIII,  chap.  1,  p.  23,  note. 


13]  "THE  COMMITTEE"  13 

ment  the  weight  which  a  staunch  party  man,  of  ample  fortune,  of  illustrious 
name,  of  ready  utterance,  and  of  resolute  spirit,  can  scarcely  fail  to  pos- 
sess,"^^  is  more  judicious,  if  more  restrained,  than  that  of  Langbaine,  who 
writes,  of  Howard:  "This  ingenious  person  is  equally  conspicuous  for  the 
lustre  of  his  birth,  and  the  excellence  of  his  parts. "^* 

As  an  individual,  however,  Howard  seems  to  have  been  possessed  of 
rather  unpleasant  personal  characteristics — notably  pride,  obstinacy,  and  a 
marked  tendency  toward  pretentiousness — which  kept  him  in  hot  water  a 
good  bit  of  the  time;unfortunately,  too,  it  is  largely  because  of  the  attacks 
made  upon  him,  instigated  primarily  because  of  the  characteristics  men- 
tioned, that  we  know  him  today.  I  refer  particularly  to  the  Dryden- 
Howard  controversy  over  dramatic  poetry,  which  will  be  discussed  in  a 
later  chapter;  we  may  devote  some  time  here,  however,  to  two  somewhat 
similar  episodes  in  Sir  Robert's  life. 

In  the  first  place,  one  of  the  personages  angered  by  the  pretentiousness 
of  Howard  was  George  Villiers,  Duke  of  Buckingham.  In  the  latter's 
play.  The  Rehearsal,  in  the  first  edition  (1663-4),  The  Poet  was  called  Bil- 
boa,  "by  which  name  Sir  Robert  Howard  was  the  person  pointed  at," 
although  the  attack  was  soon  shifted  from  Howard  to  Davenant,  and  later 
still,  when  Dryden  succeeded  Davenant  as  Poet  Laureate,  "this  moved  the 
Duke  to  change  the  name  of  the  hero  from  Bilboa  to  Bays,  directly  levelling 
his  bolt  at  Mr.  Dryden. "2«  This  attack,  then,  was  of  little  moment.  Not 
so  Shadwell's  famous  burlesque  satire  of  Sir  Robert,  in  The  Sullen  Lovers, 
or,  as  Pepys  knew  it,  The  Curious  I m pertinents}''  Shadwell  was  "so  angry 
with  the  knight  for  his  supercilious  and  domineering  manner  of  behaving, 
that  he  points  him  out  under  the  name  of  Sir  Positive  At-aH";^^  and  while 
the  play  itself  is  of  no  great  merit,^'-'  the  fun  poked  at  Howard  seems  to 


**  History  of  England  (ed.  Cheyney,  1898)  vol.  VI,  p.  90. 

^  An  Account  of  the  English  Dramatic  Poets  (Oxford,  1691)  p.  305. 

»  Betterton  The  History  of  the  English  Stage  &c.  (London  1741)  p.  8. 

See  also  Theophilus  Gibber's  Lives  of  the  Poets  vol.  Ill,  p.  58. 

The  Key  to  The  Rehearsal  expresses  doubt  as  to  whether  the  Duke  ever  planned  to  satirize 
Howard,  pointing  out  that  many  think  his  original  plan  was  to  mock  Davenant. 

"  The  Sullen  Lovers  (published  1668)  has  The  Curious  Impertinents  as  an  alternative  title. 

'*  Theophilus  Gibber  Lives  of  the  Poets  vol.  Ill,  p.  58. 

"  Pepys  (Diary  May  4,  1668)  speaks  of  "The  Impertinents"  as  "but  a  very  contemptible 
play,  though  there  are  many  little  witty  expressions  in  it,"  adding,  (May  5,  1668)  "by  Sir 
Positive  At-all,  I  understand,  is  meant  Sir  Robert  Howard."  Saintsbury,  in  his  introduction 
to  Shadwell's  Works,  (Mermaid  Series,  introd.,  p.  3),  praises  "the  lively  Jonsonian  humors 
of  Sir  Positive  At-all  and  his  fellows,"  adding  that  "although  Sir  Positive's  eccentricities  are, 
after  Shadwell's  fashion,  too  much  multiplied  and  insisted  upon,  he  is  really  a  comic  char- 
acter." 


14  SIR  ROBERT  HOWARD  [14 

have  aroused  a  good  deal  of  merriment.  As  there  is  other  evidence  to 
show  that  Shadwell's  satirization  was  uncomfortably  realistic,  let  us 
examine  the  play  for  a  moment. 

In  the  dramatis  personae  we  find  included  the  character  of  "Sir  Positive 
At-all,  a  foolish  knight,  that  pretends  to  understand  everything  in  the 
world,  and  will  suffer  no  man  to  understand  anything  in  his  company; 
so  foolishly  positive,  that  he  will  never  be  convinced  of  an  error,  though 
never  so  gross."  This  characterization  is  emphasized  throughout  the  play;  no 
matter  what  the  subject  under  discussion— music,  dancing,  painting, — Sir 
Positive  vaunts  his  prowess  and  asserts  that  he  is  a  master  in  all  fields, 
usually  dismissing  the  matter  with  his  pet  expression,  "I  have  considered 
it  thoroughly."  As  an  illustration  of  the  extent  to  which  Shadwell  carried 
his  treatment  of  Sir  Robert,  we  may  cite  the  amusing  bit  in  Act  III, 
Scene  1 ;  the  characters  have  been  speaking  of  the  game  of  trap-ball, 
whereupon  Sir  Positive  breaks  in  with,  "Why,  I  was  so  eminent  at  it  when 
I  was  a  school-boy,  that  I  was  called  Trap  Positive  all  over  the  school,"  a 
hit,  by  the  way,  which  appears  to  have  been  founded  on  fact.^" 

There  are  two  other  points  about  The  Sullen  Lovers  which  are  worthy 
of  passing  attention.  First,  among  the  characters  is  Lady  Vain,  a  courte- 
zan, "which  the  wits  then  understood  to  be  the  mistress  of  Sir  Robert 
Howard,  whom  he  afterwards  thought  proper  to  marry. "^^  The  other 
point  is,  for  our  purpose,  of  more  moment;  it  is  that,  as  Ward  has  it, 
"though  universality  seems  to  have  been  'Sir  Positive  At-all's'  foible,  it 
was  as  a  dramatic  writer  he  above  all  sought  to  play  a  part  in  the  world 
of  letters."^^  Sir  Positive  himself  (Act  III,  Scene  1)  boasts  thus:  "Nay 
then,  cousin,  I  am  an  ass,  an  idiot,  a  blockhead,  and  a  rascal,  if  I  don't 
understand  dramatic  poetry  of  all  things  in  the  world.  Why,  this  is  the 
only  thing  I  am  esteemed  for  in  England";  and  again,  (Act  V,  Scene  1), 
when  baited  by  Ninny  and  Woodcock,  he  breaks  out  with:  "This  single 
head  of  mine  shall  be  the  balance  of  Christendom;  and  by  the  strength  of 
this  I'll  undermine  all  commonwealths,  destroy  all  monarchies,  and  write 
heroic  plays."  While  Howard's  merits  as  a  dramatist  are  to  be  discussed 
later  on,  these  comments  are  included  here  to  show  that  his  reputation  as  a 
boaster  and  pretender  was  due,  in  large  part,  to  his  insistence  upon  his  own 
merits  as  a  poet  and  playwright. 

'»  Pepys'  Diary  (May  8,  1668):  "But  Lord!  to  see  how  this  play  of  Sir  Positive  At-all,  in 
abuse  of  Sir  Robert  Howard,  do  take,  all  the  Duke's  and  everybody's  talk  being  of  that,  and 
telling  more  stories  of  him,  of  the  like  nature,  that  it  is  now  the  town  and  country  talk,  and, 
they  say,  is  most  exactly  true.  The  Duke  of  York  himself  said  that  of  his  playing  at  trap-ball 
is  true,  and  told  several  other  stories  of  him." 

"  Theophilus  Gibber  Lives  of  the  Poets  vol.  Ill,  p.  58.  The  reference  is  to  Mrs.  Uphill,  the 
actress.    As  to  the  question  of  Howard's  marriage  to  her,  see  ante,  p.  12. 

^^  A  History  of  English  Dramatic  Literature  (London,  1899)  vol.  Ill,  p.  393. 


151  "THE  COMMITTEE"  IS 

We  may  conclude,  then,  that  Shadwell's  attack,  while  no  doubt  some- 
what overdone,  had  considerable  justification,  and  that  Sir  Robert,  what- 
ever his  merits  in  other  respects,  was,  as  a  man,  "a  gentleman  pretending 
to  all  manner  of  arts  and  sciences, — not  ill-natured,  but  insufiferably  boast- 
ing."^' As  diplomat,  jurist,  and  political  henchman,  zealous  and  loyal 
to  the  royal  interests,  successful  if  not  brilliant,  he  was,  as  we  have  seen, 
persona  grata  at  court  throughout  most  of  his  life;  furthermore,  while 
perhaps  arrogant  and  unduly  vainglorious,  he  nevertheless  was  generous, 
kindly,  and  in  the  main  unselfish.  And  by  us  it  must  be  recognized  that, 
whatever  his  personal  merits  or  defects,  in  the  political  and  social  life  of 
his  times  Sir  Robert  Howard  was  distinctly  a  personage. 

"  Evelyn  Diary  (February  16,  1685).  The  same  writer  again  refers  to  Howard  (June  16, 
1683)  as  "Sir  Robert  Howard,  (that  universal  pretender)." 


CHAPTER  II 
Howard:  Poet,  Dramatist,  and  Historian 

That  a  man  of  Howard's  prominence,  living  in  England  at  the  time  of 
the  Restoration,  should  dabble  in  literature  was  practically  inevitable; 
it  was  equally  inevitable,  in  the  light  of  his  personal  characteristics  as  we 
know  them,  that  he  should  greatly  overestimate  his  own  worth  as  an 
author,  and  that  the  very  pretentiousness  and  prideful  obstinacy  which 
marred  his  political  career  should  militate  against  him  far  more  disastrously 
in  a  field  in  which,  to  begin  with,  he  was  hopelessly  outclassed,  and  for  the 
activities  of  which  he  possessed  only  the  most  ordinary  qualifications. 

It  is  a  matter  of  regret,  then,  that  Howard  was  not  content  to  rest 
upon  his  well-earned  laurels  as  a  statesman  and  diplomat;  for  a  careful 
examination  of  his  literary  productions  both  for  themselves  and  in  relation 
to  the  available  criticism  thereon,  can  but  lead  one,  I  think,  to  this  con- 
clusion: that  despite  the  very  considerable  popularity,  during  his  own 
time,  of  at  least  two  of  his  plays,  there  is  in  his  work  so  little  intrinsic  merit 
as  to  bar  him  from  serious  consideration.  On  the  other  hand,  notwith- 
standing the  somewhat  overharsh  criticism  of  certain  later  writers — notably 
Theophilus  Gibber  and  Sir  Walter  Scott — Sir  Robert  was  by  no  means  a 
negligible  factor  in  the  literary  history  of  his  own  day.  For  himself, 
truly  was  he  one  of  "the  noble  family  of  Howard"  who  "were  distinguished 
for  dramatic  productions,  in  which  were  to  be  found  plot's  romantic  and 
absurd,  and  characters,  not  drawn  from  nature,  but  wild  and  ungoverned 
fancy,"^  and  who  likewise,  adds  Macaulay,  "enjoyed,  in  that  age,  the  unen- 
viable distinction  of  being  wonderfully  fertile  of  bad  rhymers.  The  poetry 
of  the  Berkshire  Howards  was  the  jest  of  three  generations  of  satirists. 
The  mirth  began  with  the  first  representation  of  The  Rehearsal  [see  ante, 
p.  13]  and  continued  down  to  the  last  edition  of  the  Dunciad."^  As  it  devel- 
oped, however,  the  real  basis  of  Howard's  literary  reputation,  and  the 
justification  of  his  being  granted  a  position  of  any  importance  in  the  world 
of  letters,  lay  not  in  his  own  merits  but  in  the  fact  that  he  was  brother-in- 
law  to  Dryden,  and,  even  more,  in  his  famous  controversy  with  the  latter 
over  the  respective  merits  of  blank  and  rhymed  verse  for  serious  plays,  a 
controversy  which  aroused  a  storm  of  discussion  at  the  time,  and  to  which 

*  Thomas'Da.vies  Dramatic  Miscellanies  (London,  1785)  vol.  Ill,  p.  307. 
^  History  of  England,  vol.  VI,  pp.  89-90.    The  attack  in  the  Dunciad  was  levelled,  not  at 
Sir  Robert,  but  at  his  brother,  Edward  Howard,  in  the  couplet  (First  Book) : 

"And  highborn  Howard;  more  majestic  sire, 

With  Fool  of  Quality  completes  the  quire." 

16 


17]  "THE  COMMITTEE"  17 

we  of  the  present  day  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude,  in  that  it  was  largely  respon- 
sible for  the  production  of  Dryden's  Essay  of  Dramatic  Poesy. 

Our  present  purpose  being,  then,  to  arrive  at  a  reasonably  correct 
estimate  of  Howard's  merits  as  an  author,  it  will  be  best  to  examine  with 
some  care  his  poetry  and  his  plays,  and  to  discuss  the  Dryden-Howard 
controversy  in  detail.  As  to  the  remaining  portion  of  his  works,  the  his- 
tories, it  will  not,  I  think,  be  necessary  to  give  them  any  further  attention; 
while  they  are  of  some  interest  as  reflecting  his  reaction  to  past  events  in 
the  light  of  his  own  times,  they  seem  not  to  have  attracted,  either  then  or 
later,  anything  more  than  the  barest  notice.  As  literature  they  are  prac- 
tically negligible.  We  may  dismiss  them,  then,  and  pass  on  to  Howard's 
more  important  literary  contributions. 


The  poetry  of  Sir  Robert  Howard  is  neither  extensive  in  quantity  nor 
in  any  way  unusual  in  quality.  His  principal  contribution  of  this  sort  is 
the  volume  of  collected  verse  published  by  Herringman  in  1660,  containing 
(1)  A  Panegyrick  to  the  King;  (2)  Songs  and  Sonnets;  (3)  The  Blind  Lady, 
a  Comedy;  (4)  The  Fourth  Book  of  Virgil;  (5)  Statins  his  Achilleis,  with 
Annotations ;  and  (6)  A  Panegyrick  to  Generall  Monck.  Howard  has  pre- 
fixed to  this  collection  the  conventional  apology  To  the  Reader,  in  which 
he  urges  that  he  himself  "had  not  stock  of  confidence  enough  to  show 
these  things  privately  to  many  friends,  much  less  to  be  furnished  with 
enough,  to  make  them  public  to  all  indifferent  persons,  had  not  the  desire 
of  the  Book-seller  [Herringman]  prevailed"  upon  him  to  sanction  their 
publication.  We  also  learn  that  most  of  the  verses  had  been  written  some 
time  before.  "For  the  severall  subjects  which  I  here  make  one  bundle,  there 
is  not  any  of  them  that  have  not  layn  by  me  these  many  years  (two  or  three 
copies  of  verses  only  excepted),"  the  Panegyrick  to  the  King,  in  particular, 
having  been  "written  when  the  King  deserved  the  Praise  as  much  as  now, 
but  separated  farther  from  the  Power,  which  was  about  three  years  since, 
when  I  was  a  Prisoner  in  Windsor  Castle." 

This  preface,  then,  is  of  some  historical  interest,  although  its  tone 
savors  a  little  of  that  mock  humility,  of  that  self-depreciation,  not  quite 
convincing  as  to  its  sincerity,  which  was  characteristic  of  Howard. 

There  is  another  sort  of  preface  to  the  1660  collection  which  merits 
even  closer  attention.  This  is  a  set  of  verses  "To  my  honored  Friend,  Sir 
Robert  Howard,  on  his  Excellent  Poems,"  by  "John  Driden."  Dryden  pays 
sincere  tribute  to  the  man  who  had  been  and  still  was  his  patron  and  friend, 
and  who  was  soon  to  be  his  brother-in-law.^  A  few  excerpts  from  the 
verses  in  question  will  suffice  to  show  their  nature. 

•  Dryden  married  Lady  Elizabeth  Howard  December  1, 1663.  For  a  fxill  discussion  of  the 
relations  of  Howard  and  Dryden  see  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter,  where  the  Dryden-Howard. 
controversy  is  discussed. 


18  SIR  ROBERT  HOWARD  [18 


And  again, 


And  finally, 


So  in  your  verse  a  native  sweetness  dwells, 
Which  shames  composure,  and  its  art  excells.* 

—  as  when  mighty  rivers  gently  creep, 
Their  even  calmness  does  suppose  them  deep. 
Such  is  your  Muse;  no  metaphor  swelled  high 

With  dangerous  boldness  lifts  her  to  the  sky. 

****** 

'TIs  strange  each  line  so  great  a  weight  should  bear, 

And  yet  no  sign  of  toil,  no  sweat  appear. 

****** 

But  to  write  worthy  things  of  worthy  men 
Is  the  peculiar  talent  of  your  pen. 

This  work,  by  merit  first  of  fame  secure, 

Is  likewise  happy  in  its  geniture; 

For  since  'tis  born  when  Charles  ascends  the  throne, 

It  shares  at  once  his  fortune  and  its  own. 

This  last  bears  particular  reference  to  the  Panegyrick  to  the  King, 
which,  though  written  some  time  before,  proved  to  be  a  very  timely  tribute 
to  Charles  II,  since  it  was  first  published  during  the  very  first  year  of  the 
Restoration.    Indeed,  it  would  seem,  as  Dryden  has  it,  that  Howard's 

Verse  no  lesse 

The  Prophet  than  the  Poet  doth  confesse. 

Dryden's  tribute  to  Howard  seems  to  have  aroused  the  contempt  of 
Scott  to  a  considerable  degree.  "Those  who  may  be  induced"  writes  Scott, 
"to  peruse  the  works  of  Sir  Robert  Howard  by  the  high  commendation 
here  bestowed  upon  them,  will  have  more  reason  to  praise  the  gratitude  of 
our  author  [Dryden]  than  the  justice  of  his  panegyric.  They  are  productions 
of  a  most  freezing  mediocrity."^  The  then  existing  relations  between 
Dryden  and  Howard  would  account  for  a  possibly  unmerited  warmth  of 
praise  on  the  part  of  the  former;  in  truth,  though,  while  the  verses  in  this 
collection  are  admittedly  mediocre,  they  seem  to  me  to  deserve  nothing 
worse  than  neglect — surely  not  open  contempt. 

It  will  hardly  be  necessary  to  present  any  full  discussion  of  the  indi- 
vidual poems  in  this  collection.  The  two  translations  are  good  of  their  kind, 
the  Achilleis  of  Statius  being  of  special  value  because  of  the  completeness 
and  detail  of  the  annotations.  The  songs  and  sonnets  are  conventional 
and  rather  poor.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  though,  that  Howard  apologizes 
for  this  by  urging,  in  the  prefatory  address,  that  "they  were  never  directed 

*  Composure — careful  composition.    It  may  be  noted  that  Dryden  throughout  praises 
rather  the  dignity  and  general  worth  of  the  verses  than  their  artistic  beauty. 
^  The  Works  of  John  Dryden  (ed.  Saintsbury,  Edinburgh,  1882)  vol.  XI,  p.  6. 


19]  "THE  COMMITTEE"  19 

to  any  particular  Beauty,  which  may  (to  the  Amorous  Reader  at  least) 
be  a  just  excuse,  if  they  want  Perfection,  to  remember  I  wanted  Passion, 
and  had  only  my  own  warmth,  unassisted  by  the  influence  of  a  Mistress.'" 
The  two  panegyrics  are  possibly  a  little  more  carefully  composed,  as  to 
rhyme  and  meter,  than  are  other  of  Howard's  works.  They  are,  however, 
over-fulsome  in  their  flattery,  and  are  marred  by  such  platitudes  as: 

To  fair  days,  storms  succeed;  to  storms,  the  fair: 
We  know  but  what  we  are  by  what  we  were. 
And  Man's  condition's  valued  more  or  less 
By  what  he  had,  not  what  he  does  possess. 
For  no  extremes  could  ever  gain  a  height 
From  their  own  natures,  but  each  other's  weight.^ 

The  remaining  contribution  included  in  this  collection,  The  Blind 
Lady,  may  best  be  considered  with  other  of  Howard's  plays,  later  on. 

Finally,  we  may  note  briefly  two  other  poetic  offerings  of  Sir  Robert's: 
the  Duel  of  the  Stags,  written  in  1668,  and  "an  excellent  poem  'against  the 
Fear  of  Death' ;  which  gained  him  a  considerable  degree  of  reputation."^ 
Each  of  these  possesses  some  merit  of  versification  and  of  subject  matter, 
the  Duel  of  the  Stags,  in  particular,  a  political  poem,  being  marked  by 
commendable  vigor  of  expression.^  This  last  poem  was  later  satirized  by 
Lord  Buckhurst,  in  The  Duel  of  the  Crahs}^ 

As  a  poet,  then,  Sir  Robert  Howard  was  but  ordinarily  successful. 
His  rhymes  are  far  too  often  mechanical;  his  themes  are  treated  conven- 
tionally, with  little  in  their  treatment  to  suggest  originality  or  personality. 
He  has,  in  short,  produced  no  poems  which  entitle  him  to  serious  considera- 
tion, although  there  is  in  his  work,  as  I  have  said,  sufficient  merit  to  render 
undeserved  such  caustic  comment  as  that  of  Scott,  or  that  of  Theophilus 
Cibber,  who  writes:  "The  merit  of  this  author  seems  to  have  been  of  a 
low  rate,  for  very  little  is  preserved  concerning  him,  and  none  of  his  works 
are  now  read;  nor  is  he  ever  mentioned,  but  when  that  circumstance  of 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham's  intending  to  ridicule  him.  is  talked  of."  And 
again,  "had  Sir  Robert  been  a  man  of  any  parts,  he  had  sufficient  advan- 

'  If  we  may  grant  the  sincerity,  or  rather,  the  truth  of  this  statement,  we  have  further 
evidence  regarding  the  period  of  Howard's  relations  with  Mrs.  Uphill;  these  verses  he  claims 
to  have  written,  at  least  in  considerable  part,  "severall  years"  before,  but  as  they  were  pub- 
lished in  1660,  it  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  even  up  to  that  time  he  was  "unassisted  by 
the  influence  of  a  mistress."  If  such  were  the  case,  his  relations  with  Mrs.  Uphill  would  date 
from  no  earlier  than  1660;  and  this  is  in  accord  with  the  other  evidence  already  presented. 

•  From  the  Pancgyrick  to  the  King.  Note  the  rh^j^e  used  in  lines  5  and  6.  Sight  rhymes 
were  Howard's  particular  weakness. 

8  Nichols  A  Select  Collection  of  Poems,  vol.  I,  p.  154,  note. 

^  In  the  1709  edition  of  The  Duel  of  the  Stags  reappear  the  verses  of  Dryden  wliich  wer« 
originally  prefixed  to  the  1660  collection  of  Howard's  poems. 

^'>  State  Poems  (1699)  Part  I,  p.  201. 


20  SIR  ROBERT  HOWARD  [20 

tages  from  his  birth  and  fortune  to  have  made  a  figure,  but  the  highest 
notice  which  he  can  claim  in  the  republic  of  letters,  is,  that  he  was  brother- 
in-law  to  Dry  den.""  ,.'.^ 


As  a  playwright,  Howard  was  both  more  successful  and  more  popular 
than  as  a  poet;  yet  most  of  his  plays,  too,  bear  the  stigma  of  mediocrity, 
partly  because  of  faulty,  somewhat  amateurish  workmanship,  partly 
because  of  his  innate  inability  to  do  justice  to  really  big,  tensely  dramatic 
scenes.  Before  criticising  farther,  however,  let  us  review  Howard's  various 
dramatic  productions  in  some  detail. 

Howard  produced  six  plays,  in  all.  Of  these  the  first,  The  Blind  Lady, 
appeared  together  with  his  poems,  in  the  collection  of  1660,  as  noted. 
The  play  is  a  crudely  constructed,  rather  loosely  organized  comedy,  in 
which  the  author  evidently  made  some  attempt  to  follow  classical  models, 
in  the  matter  of  observing  the  Unity  of  Time,  and  in  having  all  real  action 
take  place  off  the  stage,  to  be  reported  by  various  characters.  The  working 
out  of  the  plot,  however,  leaves  very  much  to  be  desired.  The  scenes 
succeed  one  another  with  bewildering  rapidity — in  the  five  acts  there  are 
twenty  nine  scenes,  in  all — and  one  is  kept  on  the  jump,  from  place  to  place, 
to  such  an  extent  that  to  keep  adequate  track  of  what  is  going  on  is  to 
say  the  least  difficult. 

Mironault  and  Phylanter,  two  courtiers,  are  in  love  with  the  Princess 
Mirramente,  who  at  first  favors  neither.  Mironault  is  traduced  to  his 
King  by  Phylanter  and,  while  visiting  the  Princess,  is  attacked  by  his 
jealous  rival.  Escaping  with  two  firm  friends,  Hyppasus  and  Pysander, 
Mironault  takes  refuge  in  the  house  of  Caeca,  a  blind  lady — representing, 
of  course,  Fortune,  the  Blind  Lady.  Here  Pysander,  a  bluff,  rough-and- 
ready,  quick  witted  soldier,  takes  the  lead  and,  by  making  love  simul- 
taneously to  Caeca  and  to  her  maid,  Quinever,  persuades  them  to  order 
Caeca's  tenants  to  fortify  the  house  against  Phylanter  and  his  troops,  who 
are  pursuing  Mironault.  Meanwhile  the  Princess,  who  has  fallen  in  love 
with  Mironault  in  turn,  hastens  to  Court  to  invoke  the  aid  of  the  King  to 
rescue  her  lover  and  to  punish  Phylanter.  On  the  way  she  meets  Amione, 
Mironault's  sister,  who  is  seeking  to  aid  him,  and  the  two  girls  join  forces. 
The  King,  persuaded  of  Mironault's  innocence  of  the  charges  against  him, 
sends  an  army  to  rescue  him,  and,  at  her  request,  puts  the  Princess  at  the 
head  of  this  army.  Mironault  and  his  followers,  having  temporarily 
repulsed  Phylanter's  forces,  are  rescued  in  time,  and  everything  is  brought 
to  a  speedy  and  happy  conclusion.  Phylanter,  defeated,  is  repentant — 
indeed,  he  began  to  be  repentant  almost  before  he  did  anything  to  repent 

"  Lives  of  the  Poets  vol.  Ill,  p.  58. 


21]  "THE  COMMITTEE"  21 

of — and  as  he  has,  during  the  course  of  the  action,  fallen  suddenly  and 
deeply  in  love  with  Amione,  her  influence  and  the  sympathetic  kindliness 
of  the  Princess  win  for  him  a  hardly  deserved  forgiveness.  Finally  the 
Princess  admits  her  love  for  Mironault,  and  all  is  well. 

In  addition  to  the  too  rapid  shift  of  scene — as  in  Act  III,  where  we 
jump  from  Caeca's  house  to  Phylanter's  camp,  then  back  to  the  house, 
then  to  Phylanter's  attacking  position  before  the  house — there  are  other 
serious  defects  in  both  plot  and  characterization.  There  are  really  two 
stories  involved — the  main  plot,  as  above,  and  the  comedy  love  affairs  of 
Pysander,  Caeca,  and  Quinever,  The  latter  furnish  some  good  rough  fun,*^ 
but  they  are  given  altogether  too  much  prominence.  The  result  is  that 
Mironault,  the  ostensible  hero,  is  almost  lost  sight  of  during  the  latter  part 
of  the  play.  As  a  whole  the  plot  is  involved,  the  action  irregular  and  too 
long  drawn  out,  and  the  play  unsatisfying.  One  feels  that  Mironault,  who 
is  well  drawn  at  first,  peters  out;  that  Phylanter,  while  rather  appealing  in 
his  recoil  from  his  own  villainy,  is  yet  not  guilty  of  anything  very  serious 
after  all,  and  is  certainly  no  villain;  and  lastly,  that  Phylanter's  amazingly 
quick  shift  of  affections  from  Miramente  to  Amione  and  the  "made-to- 
order"  fashion  in  which  everything  is  satisfactorily  adjusted  are  decidedly 
anti-climactic. 

A  word  may  be  said  here  about  the  versification  of  The  Blind  Lady. 
Most  of  the  play  is  written  in  rather  poorblank  verse,  but  at  times — as  in 
Act  III,  Scene  1,  or  in  Act  V,  Scene  1 — some  use  of  rhyme  is  made.  The 
quotation  of  a  few  lines  from  Act  III,  Scene  1,  will  show,  I  think,  that  here, 
as  elsewhere,  Howard's  work  is  unsatisfactory. 

To  be  still  subject  to  calamities 

We  all  must  bear,  yet  not  esteem  it  hard. 

Our  fraUty  sets  this  odds  from  higher  powers, 

And  their  disorders  are  appeased  by  ours. 

It  is  a  hard  injunction  of  the  gods 

To  set  our  natures  and  ourselves  at  odds; 

When  they  afflict,  though  due  unto  our  crimes, 

Yet  they  give  to  the  nature  that  repines. 

Though  if  we  use  it  well,  none  but  they  give 

That  blessing,  that  we  are  displeased  to  live. 

'Twas  life  first  cozened  man,  and  did  entice 

By  knowledge  its  fair  gift  to  cheat  him  twice; 

Man  was  a  happy  stranger  to  himself 

When  he  believed  his  ignorance  his  wealth. 

The  Blind  Lady,  then,  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  been  a  success.  Its 
workmanship  is  poor,  its  plot  weak,  and  its  characterization,  with  the 
possible  exception  of  that  of  Pysander  and  of  one  or  two  of  the  minor 
figures,  conventional  and  unconvincing. 

"  See  Act  III,  Scene  1,  Act  IV,  Scene  1,  etc. 


22  SIR  ROBERT  HOWARD  (22 

While  it  may  be  said,  in  extenuation  of  the  faults  found  in  The  Blind 
Lady,  that  this  was  Howard's  first  play  (so  far  as  is  known),  he  seems  to 
have  been  only  partially  successful  in  overcoming  these  weaknesses  later 
on,  in  the  Four  New  Plays,  published  1665,  and  in  The  Great  Favorite,  or 
The  Duke  of  Lerma,  published  1668,  and  combined  with  the  1665  edition 
into  Five  New  Plays,  \6^2.  In  the  edition  of  1665  were  contained:  (1)  The 
Surprisal,  and  (2)  The  Committee,  both  comedies;  and  (3)  The  Indian 
Queen,  and  (4)  The  Vestal  Virgin,  or  The  Roman  Ladies,  both  tragedies. 
These  four,  with  The  Blind  Lady  and  with  Howard's  later  tragedy.  The 
Duke  of  Lerma,  make  up  the  sum  total  of  his  contributions  to  dramatic 
literature.  The  Committee  will  be  reserved  for  later  treatment.  The  Blind 
Lady  has  already  been  sufficiently  discussed.  Let  us  examine  with  some 
care  the  other  plays. 

In  the  address  To  the  Reader  prefaced  to  the  Four  New  Plays  Howard 
excuses  their  publication  on  the  same  grounds  as  those  he  advanced  in 
connection  with  his  poems;  to  wit,  "these  follies  were  made'public  as  much 
against  my  inclination  as  judgment.  But  being  pursued  with  so  many 
solicitations  of  Mr.  Herringman's,  and  having  received  civilities  from  him 
if  possible  exceeding  his  importunities,  I  at  last  yielded  to  prefer  that  which 
he  believed  his  interest,  before  that  which  I  apprehended  my  own  disad- 
vantage." It  may  well  be,  however,  that  the  real  reason  for  Howard's 
putting  the  plays  into  print  lay  in  his  being  accused  by  certain  of  his 
contemporaries  of  plagiarism.  This  charge  was  made,  we  shall  see,  with 
reference  to  The  Duke  of  Lerma,  and  may  have  been  made  regarding  The 
Vestal  Virgin}^  Whatever  the  cause,  the  publication  of  Howard's  plays 
was  justified  by  the  undcubted  merit  of  The  Indian  Queen  a-nd  The  Commit- 
tee, whatever  the  defects  of  the  other  two  plays. 

The  Surprisal,  a  conventional  comedy  of  intrigue,  is  better  constructed 
than  is  The  Blind  Lady,  but  is  yet  hardly  worthy  of  much  attention. 
Pep3's  saw  it  several  times,  and  had  little  good  to  say  of  it.  On  April  8, 
1667  he  saw  "the  end  of  the  Surprisall,  wherein  was  no  great  matter," 
according  to  his  opinion.  Again  on  August  6  of  the  same  year,  he  com- 
ments: "...  saw  The  Surprisall,  a  very  mean  play,  I  thought;  or  else
