Canonical Title: THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM BY TITUS VESPASIAN, Part 1
Requested Title: THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM BY TITUS VESPASIAN, Part 1
Authors: 
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: 1677-crowne-destruction-of-jerusalem-1873
Item Title: The Destruction Of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian in Two Parts
Item Creator: John Crowne
Item Year: 1677
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM BY TITUS VESPASIAN,
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/1677-crowne-destruction-of-jerusalem-1873/1677_crowne_destruction-of-jerusalem_1873_djvu.txt
PART L 


NS 


The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian. In 
Two Parts, As it is acted in the Theatre Royal. Written 
by Mr Crowne. Part the First. London: Printed for 
James Maynes and Richard Bentley, in Russel-street, near 
the Piazzas, and the Post-house in Covent-Garden. 1677. 
4to. 


THE great success of ‘The Destruction of Jerusalem ” 
had the effect of depriving Crowne of the patronaye 
of Lord Rochester, by whose influence he had obtained 
the preference over Dryden, the Poet Laureate, in 
preparing the masque of “Calisto” for representation 

fore the King, Queen, and royal family.* The Earl 
extended the enmity he entertained towards Dryden to 
his former protégée, and, in conjunction with the Duke 
of Buckingham,+ included him in a satyre, after the 
fashion of Sir John Suckling’s ‘ Session of the Poets,” 
entitled, ** A Tryal of the Poets for the Bays, in imitation 
of a Satyre by Boileau,” in which they ridiculed ‘little 
starch Johny Crown, with his iron’d cravat” and ‘‘Lilly- 
white hands,” in lines so puerile and coarse as are by no 
means calculated to produce on the public mind a favour- 
able impression either of the satirical talents or gentle- 
manly bearing of the two noble authors. A similar set 
of verses has been included in the collection of State 
Poems,{ under the title, ‘‘ The Session of the Poets, to 
the Tune of Cook-Laurel,” meaning probably Cock 
Lorell. It is proper to mention that Crowne is omitted 
in this list of claimants for the Bays. 

Amongst the prefatory matter prefixed to the edition 
of *‘ The Works of the Earl of Rochester, Roscommon, 
and Dorset, &c., 1731,”§ there is prefixed a letter ad- 
dressed by St Evremont to the Duchess of Mazarin,]|| 


* See Crowne’s ‘‘ Dramatic Works,” Vol. I., p. 221. | 

+ Buckingham’s Works, Vol. I., p. 151. Third edition. 
London, 1715. 8vo. 

J State Poems, in 4 Vols. 8vo. London, 1716. Vol. I. p. 206. 

2 Vols. 12mo. London, 1731. 

When Charles II. was in: exile, he proposed to marry this 
lady, the niece, and eventually heiress, of Cardinal Mazarin, 
but his offer was rejected by heruncle. After the Restoration, 
the Duchess became heiress of the Cardinal, and, after indulg- 
ing in the levities of a Parisian life, came to England; and: 
became one of the beauties of the Court of the Merry Monarch. 


218 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


which discloses the real cause of Rochester’s malice, and 
explains why the noble Lord had changed his opinion of 
Crowne. After mentioning that his temper was more 
or less ‘‘inspired with wine,” and his muse increasing 
“with his liquor, many persons of quality, his friends, 
romoted the glass, to his detriment, for their own satis- 
tion. It is certain that in his natural temper, when 
sober, he was a good-natured man, and had net that 
alloy of malice which in many things he diseovered when 
heated by a debauch. He had a particular pique to Mr 
Dryden, after his mighty success in the town, either be- 
cause he was sensible that he deserved not that applause 
for his Tragedies which the mad, unthinking audience 
gave them—which corruption of taste was afterwards 
somewhat corrected by the Duke of Buckingham’s 
rehearsal; or whether it was out of indignation at being 
rivalled in reputation either as a poet in general, or a 
satirist in particular—satire being one of the chief ex- 
cellencies of Mr Dryden as well as that of My Lord 
Rochester. The effect of this was discovered by his 
Lordship setting up Mr Crowne in opposition to Mr 
Dryden. He recommended him to the King, ordering 
him to compose a masque for the Court, when it was the 
business of the Poet-Laureate. 

“But when Mr Crowne’s ‘ Destruction of Jerusalem ’ 
had met with as wild and unaccountable success as Mr 
Dryden's ‘ Conquest of Granada,’ his Lordship withdrew 
his favour, as if he would be still in contradiction to the 
town ; and in that perhaps he was generally in the right, 
for of all audiences in polite nations perhaps there is not 
one that judges so very falsely of the Druma as the 
English, unless it be the Spaniard, who seem to have 
much the same wild injudicious taste.” 

This communication of St Evremont is valuable as the 
evidence of one who had the best means of knowing the 
real character of the Earl of Rochester, and the cause of 
his change of opinion as to the merits of one whom he 
probably patronised more for the purpose of mortifying 
Dryden than for any other reason. rn of an ancient 
Norman family, Charles de St Denis, Seigneur de St Evre- 
mont, was alike distinguished for gallantry and wit. The 
latter brought him to grief, and finally a joke on Cardinal 


THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 219 


Mazarin placed him in the Bastile. Upon his liberation 
he p to Holland, from whence he retreated to Eng- 
land, where he was much esteemed by Charles for his 
liveliness, and from whom he received a small pension. 
He was held in much estimation by his two country- 
women, the Duchess of Mazarin and the Duchess of 
Portsmouth. His society was in great request by per- 
sons of rank, and he had the honour of having Dryden 
as his eulogist in a ‘‘ character” written by the Laureate, 
which was prefixed to a work entitled ‘‘ Miscellaneous 
Essays, by Monsieur St Evremont, translated from the 
French ; with his Character, by a person of honour here 
in England ; continued by Mr Dryden.” This “‘ person” 
is generally sup to have been Dr Knightly Chet- 
wood, who died Dean of Gloucester—a belief fortified by 
‘‘his connection with Dryden.” * 

If the “Conquest of Granada,” otherwise called 
‘‘Almanzor and Almahide,” was received with such 
extraordinary applause, it creates little surprise that 
the ‘* Destruction of Jerusalem»” met with similar suc- 
cess, for so far as reyards versification Crowne not 
unfrequently equals, if not surpasses, Dryden. Passages 
might be extracted from both dramas of considerable 
force and excellence. Probably the success of the 
‘Conquest of Granada” induced Crowne to try if he 
could be as successful with the Jews and Romans as the 
Laureate had been with the Moors and Spaniards. The 
latter tragedy is also in two parts, and was first acted 
in 1672, The former did not appear until 1677. As the 
‘* Rehearsal” was published immediately after the suc- 
cessful representation of the ‘Siege of Granada,” and 
some four or five years before the performance of the 
‘‘ Destruction of Jerusalem,” it, fortunately for its author, 
escaped the tender mercies of his Grace of Buckingham 
in his inimitable satire. He was subsequently ridiculed by 
the pointless attack of the two noblemen in the wretched 
doggrel already referred to. 

There is a striking resemblance between the hero of 
Dryden and the hero of Crowne. Phraartes, the deposed 


= ee Scott’s ‘‘Dryden.” Second edition. Vol. XVIII. 


-” 
e 


220 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


monarch of Parthié, and ‘tha lover of Claronk, id both 
parta of the “Destruction of Jérusalem,” has all the 
characteristics of Almanzor, the Drawcansir of the 
‘¢ Rehearsal,” so much so, that it is not’ easy to decide 
whether he or Almanzor deals most in wordy declama- 
tion and outrageous bombast. Of the latter, take this 
specimen: In the second part, Phraartes, who has re- 
covered his kingdom, on his return to Jerusalem, is 
resent at the deathbed of Clarona, his intended Queen. 
rhen the vital spark is extinguished, he exclaims: 


‘¢_______ Where is Clarona gone ? 
Aloft! I see her mounting to the sun! 
The flaming Satyr towards her does roll ; 
His scorching lust makes summer at the pole. 
Let the hot planet touch her, if he dares! 
Touch her, and I will cut him into stars, 
And the bright chips into the ocean throw.” 


Phraartes is an imaginary monarch, there having been 
at that time no King of Parthia of the name, although 
at an earlier period, as we learn from Josephus,* there 
does occur a king so called in the list of rwers. He was 
murdered by his son Phraartaces, whom he had by a 
second wife called Hermusa, a lady of very questionable 
reputation. The murderer, turning out to be somewhat 
tyrannical, his subjects wisely put him to death before 
he was fairly settled on the throne. With him termin- 
ated the race of Phraartes. 

' The second arte of the ‘‘ Destruction of Jerusalem ” 
commences with the siege, and terminates with the de- 
struction of Jerusalem. The loves of Titus and Berenice 
in & great measure supersede Phraartes and Clarona, who 
engrossed the principal interest in the previous part of 
the drama, which, unlike the ‘‘ Conquest of Granada,” 
where Almanzor finally finds a father and a wife, ends un- 
happily, Clarona being murdered, and Titus and Berenice, 
though’ dying in love of‘each other, separated in con- 
sequence of the detestation the Romans bore towards the 
Jews, and their horror at the very notion of Titus giving 


* Josephus, by Lodge. London, 1640. . P. 463. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM: 921 


them a Jewish empress. If the scandal about her* can 
be credited, the Emperor made a lucky escape. 

Although Rochester felt greatly chagrined at the un- 
expected success of Crowne, he received the flattering 
dedication of Otway’s ‘‘ Tragedy of Titus and Berenice,” 
a poor abridgement, in rhyme, of Racine’s Tragedy of 
the same name, which met with little success—a circum- 
stance that would naturally not diminish the Earl’s 
bitterness towards Crowne, 

Nauseating as the flattery of Otway to his patron 
assuredly is, it falls short of Crowne’s hyperbolical laud- 
ation of the Duchess of Portsmouth, which disgraces the 
dedication to her Grace of the ‘‘ Destruction of. Jeru- 
salem.” Before perusicg it, the reader may not be dis- 
inclined to know something about this surpassing beauty. 
who ruled, during the latter days of Charles II., the king- 
doms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. - 

Mademoiselle Louise Renee de Penencourt de 
Querouaille came to England as maid of honour to the 
King’s sister, Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans, who was 
successfully employed by the French monarch to bring 
about a union between himself and her brother. Evelyn.t 
4th November 1671, after mentioning he had seen the 
King’s nephew, the Prince of Orange, afterwards 
William III., whom he describes as ‘‘ having a manly, 
courageous, wise countenance, resembling his mother 
and the Duke of Gloucester,” continues thus: “I now 
also saw that famous beauty, but, in my opinion, of a 
childish, simple, and baby face, Mademoiselle, lately 
maid of honour to Madame, and now to be so to the 
Queen.” She was then about twenty-five years old. 

Louis XIV., aware of the amorous propensities of 
the English king, purposely sent Louise to England 
to attract his notice, which she had no difficulty in 
doing. If the satirical verses upon her can be credited, 
her first love was the Duc de Vendome, to whom. 
she continued to be attached long after she became 
Duchess of Fortsmouth. One of these pasquils has 
some cleverness: 


* See introduction to the second part. 
+ Diary, Vol. II. p. 52. 


222 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


‘When Portsmouth did from England fly 
To follow her Vendome, 
Thus all along the Gallery * 
The monarch made his moan: 
O Castlemaine,t for charity, 
Send me my Cleveland{ home. 


‘‘Go, nymph so foolish and unkind, 
Your wandering knight pursue, 
And leave a love-sick king behind, 
So faithful and so true. 
Ye Gods, when you made Love so blind, 
You shou’d have lam’d him too.” 


Barbara Villiers, daughter of the chivalrous Viscount 
Grandison, and wife of Roger Palmer, Earl of Castle- 
maine, became one of the mistresses of Charles II., who 
made her Duchess of Cleveland, but was supplanted by 
the Duchess of Portsmouth and Nell Gwyn. Granger§ 
observes: “Though her pride was great, she is said to 
have been sometimes humble enough in her amours.” 
Wycherly, the dramatic writer, was one of her lovers ; 
and she intrigued with Jacob Hall the Rope-Dancer and 
Goodman the Player at the same time. Hall was in 
great request with the ladies, who considered him an 
Adonis for symmetry and a Hercules for strength. The 
Duchess, according to Grammont, allowed him a salary. 

The fair French woman came, saw, and conquered : 
the infatuated monarch offered no resistance, and was 
made a willing prisoner. Wealth and honours were 
heaped upon her. She displaced all the previous 


* The Gallery at Whitehall, where the Duchess had very 

lendid apartments. It appears from Evelyn (Vol. ii p. 311) 
that that portion of the buildings over the Stone Gullery at 
Whitehall to the water-side, beginning with apartments of the 
Duchess of Portsmouth, was consumed by fire, 10th April 
1690. 

+ Roger Palmer, Earl of Castlemaine, the husband of the 
Duchess. In the ‘‘ Poems on State Affairs,” Vol. I. p. 134, 
Castellion is the name of the person she was living with then. 

¢ Charles had discarded his old love, the Duchess of Cleve- 
land, 7 his new one, created Duchess of Portsmouth, August 
19, 1673. 

§ Vol. V. p. 361. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 223 


favourites, with the exception of Nelly, whose influence 
over the King continued till his death. 

The apartments of the favourite at Whitehall were 
magnificent. Evelyn saw, 16th Sept. 1673, ‘‘ casually” 
the ‘Duchess of Portsmouth’s splendid apartments at 
Whitehall, luxuriously furnished, and with ten times 
the richness and glory beyond the Queen’s suite—many 
massy pieces of plate, whole tables, and stands of in- 
credible value.” 

The Duchess had a formidable enemy in the Earl of 
Rochester, whose opinion of her Grace may be gathered 
from the following verses : 


‘¢ PoRTSMOUTH’S LOOKING-GLASS.* 


**‘ Methinks I see you, newly risen 
From your embroider’d bed, * * 
With studied mein and much grimace, 
Present yourselfe before your Glass 
To varnish and rub o'er those graces 
You rub’d off in your night embraces ; 
To set your hair, your eyes, your teeth, 
With all the powers you conquer with ; 
Lay trains of Love, and State -intrigues, 
In powders, trimmings, and curl’d wigs ; 
And neatly choose and neatly spread 
Upon your cheeks the best French red ; 
Indeed, for white none can compair 

. With those you naturally wear. 
And tho’ her Highness+ much delights 
To laugh and talk about your whites, 
I never could perceive your Grace 
Make use of any for your face. 
Here ’tis you practice all your art 
To triumph oer a monarch’s heart ; 
Tattle and smile, and wink, and twink on’t, 
It almost makes me sick to think on’t. 


* “Poems on State Affairs,” Vol. I. p. 164; London, 1716 ; 
8vo.; where they are depend accigaed. to Rochester. They 
occur also in the collected works of his Lordship, previously re- 
ferred to. 

+ Catberine of Braganza, the Queen. 


224 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


These are. your master-strokes of beauty, 
That keep poor Rowley to hard duty ; 
And how can all these be withstood . 
By frail and amorous flesh and blood ? 
These are the charms that have bewitch'd him, 
As if a conjuror’s rod had switch’d him; 
Made him he knows not what to do, 

But loll and fumble here with you. 
Amongst your ladies, and his chitts, 

At cards and council here he sits, 

Yet minds not how they play at either, 
Nor cares not when ‘tis walking weather; - 
Bus’ness and power he has resign’d, 

And all things to your mighty mind. . 

Is there a minister of state, 

Or any treasurer of late, 

That’s fawning and imperious too, 

He owes his greatness all to you, 

And as you see just cause to do’t, 

You keep him in, or put him out. 

Hence ’tis you give us war and peace ;: 
Raise men ; disband them, as you please ; 
Take away pensions ;. retrencl: wages, 
For petticoats and lusty pages ; 

Contrive and execute all laws, 

Suiting the judges to the cause.* 


You govern every Council-meeting, 

Make the fools do as you think fitting; 
Your Royal Cully has command 

Only from you at second hand: 

He does but at the helm appeare, 

Sit there and sleepe, while your slaves steer ; 
And you are the bright Northern Starre — 
By which they guide their men of warre.” 


The author of ‘‘The Peerage of England,” 1711, Vol. 
II. p. 316, says that Rochester died on the 26th July 


* The Duke of Lauderdale, who had a thorough knowledge of 
the Scotish judges, used to tell in England that the law of Scot- 
land might be stated in this short ‘‘compend,’’—‘‘ Shew me 
the man and I'll shew you the law.” If we can credit Rochester, 
the English judges adopted a similar rule for deciding causes, 


THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 295 


1680,* so that he could not have been author of the 
verses : 


‘¢On THE DUCHESS OF PorTSMOUTH’S PICTURE. 
‘* September 1682. 


‘* Who can on this Picture look, 
And not strait be wonder-struck 
That such a speaking dowdy thing 
Should make a beggar of a King, 
Three happy nations turn to tears, 
And all then former love to fears ; 
Ruin the great, and raise the small, 
Yet will by turns betray them all? 
Lowly born and meanly bred, 
Yet of this nation is the head ; 
For half Whitehall make her their court, 
Tho’ th’other half make her their sport. 
Monmouth’s tamer, Jeffery’s advance, 
Foe to England, spy to France, 
False and foolish, proud and bold, 
Ugly, as you see, and old ; 
In a word, her mighty Grace 
Is whore in all things but her face.” 


Evelyn has a very interesting account of her Grace’s 
entertainment of the Morocco ambassador at her ‘‘ glori- 
ous apartments” at Whitehall, at which he was present : 
—‘*24 January 1682. This evening I was at the enter- 
tainment of the Morocco Ambassador at the Duchess of 
Portsmouth’s glorious apartments at Whitehall, where 
was a great banquet of sweetmeats and music: but at 
which both the Ambassador and his retinue behaved 
themselves with extraordinary moderation and modesty, 
though placed about a long table, a lady between two 
Moors, and amongst these were the King’s natural chil- 
dren, viz., Lady Litchfield and Sussex, the Duchess of 
Portsmouth, Nelly, &c., &c., concubines, and cattle of 


* Other genealogists fix the date of his demise in 1681, which 
would still negative his authorship. 


2 15 


226 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


that sort, as splendid as jewells and excess of bravery 
could make them: the Moors neither admiring nor 
seeming to regard anything, furniture or the like, with 
any earnestness, and but decently tasting of the banquet. 
They drank a little milk and water, but not a drop 
of wine; they also drank of a sorbit and jacolat,* 
but did not look about or stare on the ladies, 
or express the least surprise, but with a courtly 
negligence, in pace, countenance, and whole behaviour, 
answering only to such questions as were asked with a 
great deal of gallantry ; and so gravely took leave, with 
this compliment, that God would bless the Duchess of 
Portsmouth and the Prince her son, meaning the little 
Duke of Richmond. The King came in at the latter end, 
just as the Ambassador was going away. In this manner 
was this slave—for he was no more at home—entertained 
by most of the Nobility in Town; and he went after to 
Hyde Park on horseback, where he and his retinue 
showed their extraordinary activity in horsemanship, 
and flinging and catching their lances at full speed: 
they rode very short, and could stand upright at full 
speed,t managing their horses with incredible agility. 

e went sometimes to the theatres, where, upon any 
foolish or fantastic action, he could not forbear laughing, 
- but he endeavoured to hide it with extraordinary 
modesty and gravity. Ina word, the Russian Ambas- 
sador, still at Court, behaved himself like a clown, com- 
pared to this civil heathen.” 

‘‘ The Duchess,” remarks Granger, ‘‘ occasionally dis- 
sembled love, the vapours, or sickness, and rarely ever 
failed of working the easy monarch to her point. Her 
polite manners and agreeable temper rivetted the chains 
which her personal charms had imposed upon him: she 
had the first place in his affections, and he continued to 
love her to the day of his death. Her beauty, which 
was not of the most delicate kind, seemed to be very 
little impaired at seventy years of age.” She survived 
the monarch forty-nine years, attained the advanced age 
of eighty-nine, and died in November 1734. Her sister 


* Sherbet and Chocolate. 
+ Diary, Vol. IT. p. 
t Vol. V. p. 363. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 997 


married Philip, Earl of Pembroke, with whom she led a 
miserable life. After his death she married a French 
marquis, and died at Paris in 1728. 

Her Grace had one son by the King, who conferred 
upon him the Dukedom of Richmond in England and 
Lennox in Scotland. These honours had lapsed to 
the Crown upon the death of the last Duke, a Stewart, 
to whom as next of kin the monarch was served heir- 
male in Scotland. Instead of Stewart or De Querouaille* 
his father gave him the surname of Lennox, which 
continues in his descendants. 

The death of Rochester in July 1680+ removed a 
bitter enemy of the Duchess; and amongst those he 
had patronized, one eminent dramatic author was for- 
tunate enough to repair his loss by obtaining the patron- 
age of the favoured mistress of Charles, who accepted 
the dedication of the tragedy by which he is best known 
in the present time, and which has continued to keep its 
place as an acting drama ever since. This dedication 1s in 
the usual style, but not quite so absurd as that which 
Crowne prefixed to the ‘‘ Destruction of Jerusalem.” 
Otway assures the Duchess that nature and fortune were 
certainly in league when she was born, and that league 
she ‘‘ first took care to give her beauty enough to enslave 
the hearts of all the world, so the other resolved to do 
its merits justice, that none but a monarch fit to rule 
should ever possess it, and in it he had an empire.” 
This is followed up by referring to the ‘blooming 
virtues of the young Prince presented by her to the 
Monarch, which easily declares the mighty stock he 
came from,” and of whose noble and generous education 
all the pious care of a dear mother and a prudent 
guardian had taken care. He concludes by an earnest 
prayer that “rich blessings of every description may 
crown his future fortunes.” f 


* In many of the pamphlets of the times he is called Carwell 
or Carewell. 

+ His only son died the following year, when the Earldom of, 
Rochester and Barony of Wilmot became extinct in that 
family. 

¢ Preface to ‘‘ Venice Preserved.” First edition. London, . 
1682. 4to. 


228 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


Otway was fortunate in his protectress, for her Grace 
was of more substantial service to him than his late 
patron had been, and he says, “ Your noble pity and com- 
cpaaree found me where I was far cast back from my 

lessing, down in the rear of fortune, call’d me up, 
placed me in the shine, and I have felt its comfort. You 
have in that restor’'d me to my native right, for a steady 
faith and loyalty to my Prince was all the inheritance 
my father left me, and, however hardly my ill fortunes 
deal with me, ’tis what 1 prize so well, that I ne’er 
pawn’d it yet, and hope I shall never part with it.” Itis 

leasing to have this testimony of the kindness of the 

uchess to the ill-fated poet, upon his own admission— 
the more particularly as from his having been a ser- 
vant of Rochester, he could hardly have expected to re- 
ceive favours from one whom his patron had taken every 
opportunity of ridiculing and insulting. This gleam of 
sunshine was brief, and immediately passed away on the 
death of Charles, when the accession of a brother, whose 
endeavours to restore Popery ultimately caused the ex- 
clusion of the race of Stewart from the throne of the 
three kingdoms. 

With the death of Charles the influence of the Duchess 
terminated, as, from her having promoted the bill for 
the exclusion of the Duke of York, she had incurred the 
displeasure of a vindictive and revengeful ruler.* The 
Yoong Prince,” who had been made Master of the 
Horse by his father in the room of his brother the 
Duke of Monmouth, was dismissed for the indiscretion 
of his mother, although a child at the time. Her 
Grace’s pensioners naturally must have suffered by her 
fall.{ The Duke of Richmond could not have been much 
more than twelve years of age when his uncle thought 


* The cruelties perpetrated by his order, or with his know- 
ledge, after the suppression of Monmouth’s rebellion can never 
be palliated or overlooked. His punishment of Monmouth 
may have been warranted, but the wholesale murder of his 
adherents never can. 

+ Otway died in a state of great misery upon the 14th of 
April 1685, having survived the accession of James II. two 
months and eight days. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 229 


proper, in contempt of the death-bed request of his 
brother, to deprive him of his office.* 

Scott, in a notice prefixed to a song called ‘‘ The 
Fair Stranger, who was detained by Charles and 
made a Duchess,” observes, ‘‘ Notwithstanding the de- 
testation in which she was held by his subjects on 
account of her religion, country, and politics, she con- 
tinued to be Charles’ principal favourite till the very 
hour of his death, then he recommended her and her son 
to his successor’s protection.” The revolution restored 
the young Duke to royal favour, and he was aupeie 
aide-de-camp to William III. whilst serving under him 
during the wars in Flanders. He was subsequently one 
of the Lords of the Bedchamber of George I., and died 
on the 27th May 1723, at Goodwood, at the age of fifty- 
five.t He married Anne, second daughter of Francis, 
Lord Brudenel, and by her had one son, Charles, who, 
on the death of his grandmother in 1734, succeeded to 
the Duchy of Aubigny, in France, in addition to the 
ris and Scotish Dukedoms inherited from his 

ther. 

Whatever may be the opinion of modern times on the 
subject of dramas in rhyme, there seems little doubt but 
that after the Restoration they were more than tolerated 
during the whole reign of Charles II., whose taste had 
been influenced by his residence in France, where the 
force and beauty of blank verse were little known, and 
continue even now to be held in little esteem. His 
Majesty’s taste must have materially influenced the 
Court, and the patronage of the ruling favourite would 
not be without its due weight with the noble courtiers. 
Added to this, the covert attack upon the Puritans of 
the Commonwealth under the designation of Pharisees t 
would be greatly relished by the play-going citizens of 
London, many of whom would not have forgotten the 


* Dryden’s Works. Second edition. Edinburgh, 1821]. 
Vol. XI., p. 163. 

+ Brydges’ Edition of Collins. Vol. I. p. 206. London, 1812. 
8vo 


t “Fanaticks are but Jews uncircumcis'd.”—pilogue to 
First Part, p. 310. 


230 THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. 


annoyances they were subjected in by the intolerance of 
the rigidly righteous. ; 

The actors are not given in the printed copy of the 
drama, but Geneste, quoting Downes,* assigns the part 
of Phraartes to Hart; Mathias, to Mr Dunn; John, to 
Cartwright; Titus, to Kynaston; Berenice, to Mrs 
Marshall; and Clarona, to Mrs Boutell. 

5 The first part ends before the commencement of the 
iege. 

The same writer says: “ Both these tragedies are in 
rhyme; and it is not easy to say whether the plan or 
the execution of them is the worse. They were well 
received by the town, and the second part was re- 
vived at Drury Lane, July 1, 1712.” He quotes from 
Crowne’s dedication a part‘of the concluding paragraph: 
‘‘T fix your Grace’s image at this Jewish Temple-gate, 
to render the building sacred.” He should have finished 
the quotation: ‘‘Nor can the Jews be angry with so 
beautiful a profanation; and in guiding them to you,
