Canonical Title: FLORA'S VAGARIES
Requested Title: FLORA'S VAGARIES
Authors: Richard Rhodes
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_floras-vagaries_rhodes-richard_1677
Item Title: Flora's vagaries. 1677
Item Creator: Rhodes, Richard
Item Year: 1677
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: FLORA'S VAGARIES
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_floras-vagaries_rhodes-richard_1677/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_floras-vagaries_rhodes-richard_1677_djvu.txt
> = — (1) . : - 
. 
: 
” 


| Flora's Vagaries. 


——. 


Adus Primus, 


O”—_— — — — 


Enter OQtrante and Flora. 


Ye Madam, leave, ſpoil a good Face with crying, and 
ſpend your breath'in ſighing, ſobs, and heigh-hoes, you 
little Sink how ill it looks on you, _ 
Orr. Didſt thou but feel the burthen of my woes, or 
could'ſt derive them from the ſame Spring - head, thou 
whould'it not laugh at, but aſſiſt my griefs, and help 


Rt won a pitch of wonder, ſo thou and 7like two forſaken 
"Flo. 


ur would fit endearing one anothers ſorrows, 

| pon a houſe fide in the Sun - ſhine : hey-day, here was arap- 
ture with all my heart, I'le be whipt if you don't cty your ſelfer'e 

| long into the lamentable condition of making Madrigals, teaching 

Black 'birds to whiſtle the Tunes of them, 

© Orr, Infenſible Girle, would thou had'ſ half my cauſe. 

Flor, Why I have al. Does not the old man plague me. and Ferrer 
me about as much as you? Yet Thave no mind to be a Turtle, you had 
better be a Magpie and chatter at him as 7db. | 

Otr. O but he is not thy Father : Mine heis, and piety forbids the 
breach of Duty: ſure Juſtice has laid by her equal ſcales, to blend 
misfortunesthus with Innocence, were but my Fathers jealous paſſions 
could bear, like thee, and ſmile at, -but to-be guiltleſs 

can but grieve ? 
dam, even 7am that hard hearted thing that am won» 
t cannot.cry for you, You are reſolved then not to ſeek 


drous ſorry, - 
for a Remedy. | 

” + © Otr, Alaſs, where ſhall 7find one? | 

Flo I can propoſe a way, if you have grace to follow it, and then 
take heed you be not too nice in your Superſtitious points of Obedi» 


EnCe. 
_ _ Orr, Taare not infringe my ous to my Father. : 
| - Fla kdo not mean down right hoſtility. A little Rallio oaly that 


than't flye paſt indempnity. 
Qtr, It is to great a Crime, B Fla... 


(2) 


Flo, Why then even march.us to our Chamber, and: cry-0n nd: 


make ſpeeches to your looking - glaſs: did ever any Woman 


make Conſcience of being put into.a capacity .of having her own: 


will. 
Otr. And yetin troth 7 would fain be-at liberty, 
Flo, And you would have it drop into your mouth; 
Orr, 1 would do a little, but-nat. too much; 
Flo. O, no, you-ſhan't, Midam, (* ſee ſhe will come to it; who- 


ever will bend a Commandement, "tis ten to one, crack. it ere they 


have done) why.then you muſt*reſolve to love ſome body or other, 
and marry him as ſoon as you can.. 
Otr, Without my.Fathers conſent ? 


Flo. It ſhall not ainſt his conſent, for you ſhall never ack it to- 


have itdenyed, and ſo long no matter. 
Otr, But that's the way to be a begger, 
Flo. You raiſemore ObjeQtions than an Engliſh Teacher, 
Otr,, But how can-it be otherwiſe ?* 
Flo. Never fear it, wee'l make it out one way or other, 
Orr, Iam very fearful. 


Flo, You need not. Truſt me Madam, come, let's in, Ile tell you 


more (old man look to your hits, w'are like to be- two to one} come 


CExi.. 


Scene the Second, Enter Franciſco with a Key. 
Fran, This Smith's an excellent Artiſt, the Rogue has hit it to a hair, 


I try'd the key. laſt night, and it.opens as honeſtly-as it were Legiti- 


mate. 
Enter Lodovico;. 


Led. Well; Franciſco, | keep touch with you, what's the-buſineſs 


nr . - 

Fra. You'l hardly- gueſs what on came hither for, 

Loed.l cannot imagine, pray ee diſcover, 

Fra, If I ſhould ask you, if you are myfriend, 1 
on would leſſen the Relation : I dare not doubt you are 
Ledovico, ha's too much Nobleneſs to alter. 

Led, Why this to me ? 

Fra, Not that Ido ſuſpeRt yau, but this in ſhort, my future hapi- 


neſs depending on your Kingneſs and Afiſtance, you cannot blame-: 


my being ſo ſollitious in an Aﬀeair of- ſuch Importance. 
Lod. Be it honeſt, you may command me, you know I dare fight. 
Fra, I do not uſe to ask my friends thoſe things that are not ſo, no, 


Legdovico, had it been otherwiſe, I could have found ſome others to . 


a not one ſo vertuous, 1 

. Then ſpeak it, and command a ready Servant. - "> 
Fa, Why-thus, you know this houſe, 

1294. Not 1, whoſe is it ? - | | Fra. 


know the queſti-- 
rod ſame, -. 


1 


(3) | 

Fre, Tis old Grimanies the rich Senators, he has a Davgiier 
ſcen and loved, and that with ſuch a doting Paſſion, nothing fra 
enjoyment can preſerve my life ; ſhe's —_— and rich to boot. 

Lod. And fo 'tis an even lay, which you love beſt, the Money 
or the Wench? 

Fra, No, prethee, no; but both do well you know. 

Lod Never perſwade me, thou canſtbefch an Afs to love_a Wo. 
man, to prove it, prethee let me hear the Ryme. 

Fra, Is this like a Friend ? 

Led. Nay I won'c believe thou art in Love, till1hear thon learn'ft 
on the Cittern, and ſing'it doleful broken hearted Ditties to it. 

Fra. Come, we have you at it one of theſe dayes, and then you 
will commence in Poetry. 

Led. If er'e thou doſt ſee me in Love, mavk me (as I muſt firſkcom- 
mit ſome horrid ſin, and that fall down-a heavy judgment for it) I'le 
give thee leave to Rime me to Death, or to polt me all over with rot- 
gcn Eggs till 1 look like a Frog, to lead me out of Town with a Fry- 
ing - pan and a Fiddle, and ſhow me in the Subburbs for a Monſter, with 
& painted Cloth, a Jack-pudding, and a Cymbal. . 

Fre. Well Sir, yau'brepent of this Herefic, there are handſome Wo- 
men good ſtore in Verona, we ſhall have you a Votary one time or 0- 
ther, butlet that paſs, will you aſſiſt me now in my deſign ? 

Lod. I had rather help to make thee ſober'again, pox, are there not 
enough to be had for money, but thou muſt throw away thy Liferty, 
and run mad for a yoke - fellow; (Love! ) out uponi't, 'tis worſe than 
muſty Drink, or Lodging at a Tafow-Chandlers. 

Fra, Well, bad asit is, Iam initup to the cars, and cannot out: 
will you help me? 

Lod. Halt got the old mans conſent? 

Fra, No, then | ſhould not need your affiſtance, 

Lod. What can you do then? 

Fra. Why, 1 would ſteal her away. 

Lad, you yould have me help you, this is'the honeſt Employ. 
ment you haye for one, Franciſco. 

Fra; Why, ſo it is, Lodovics. 

Led, 1 underſtand not how. . ; 

Fra. 1 have addreſt my ſelf to- her, ſhe loves me, and has contrived 
the Plot her ſelf; do you ſce this Key, 'tis to the back-Gate | 
-of the Garden, ſhe gave it me, a friend of mine has ſent for old Grimes 
.out this Afternoon, he is — may convey her without danger. 

Lod. This ſounds but ve a | 

Fra, Woul'd I were Hd Of him, but I muſt uſe him now, by our 
friendſhip, by all that's good 'tis true, I do not uſe to lye, Ledowee, 


Bz' Led, 


| (4) 

Lod yon do abuſe me, I ſhall not take it kindly, "tis not quite- 

honeſt, for Grimani will be wronged, but fince the Woman has 'a mind 

to it, and if ſhe mygſs this way, ſhe will have't another ; and thou art 

in this lamentable loneing Condition, Z wilt help thee for once, when 
muſt we doit? would fain hear it over. .. | 


Fra, That's kindly ſpoken, why, this afternoon, meet me here; be- 
twixttwa and three, and we'l about it. | 

Led. Thad rather venture catching the Plague with thee, than be thy 
ſecond in this buſineſs; for by my troth 'tis but a Noble kind of Baw- 
dery, well, I'le meet you, butpre'thee try betwixt this and that to un- 
change thy amorous humour, /cou'd. doit in the drinking a quart of 
ſmall Beer, though 7 were hiſſing hot in Cpid's flames, - 

Fra, "Tis too late now, Farowel, remember, 


Lod. Farewel. - CEx. feveraly. 
Scene the Therd, : 


Enter Grimani, Otrante, Flor, «nd Giacomo. 
s. Gre, Come, come,-young Wenches-muſt not be lazy, 7 muſt not 
have you ſpend your time in prinking and pranking your ſelves and 
gadding abroad. Idleneſs and cating breeds Diſeaſes; ; 
, Flo, Even as much money and no brains breeds Senators. F[ aſide, 

Gri. Your Mother at your years drove another gueſs Trade, can 
tell you. 

Flo. Why, Uncle, ſhe did not weave Bone-lace and -Incle, 7 hope 
iO ſhe ? ſure my Aunt was better bred, 

Gri, No, C:c:ly, but Tle make you do't and you anger me; ' + 

Flo, Faith, Uncle, ' do but make your Man G:acomo amongſt his Ac 

aintance, provide each of us with-an old Hat, a Broomſtick, a Shut- 
= anda frize Jump, turn us out under a warm Hedge, my Coſin and 
T will ſetup for our ſelves. 

Gia, Sir, if you pleaſe, 7. will procure them towork journey-work 
under my Mother, ſhe and my Siſter are of the ſame Vocation. . 

Gri, Sirrah. Well, Gentlewoman, 'you and your Cofin long to be 
o:dding. If I ſhould take you. at your word, you'l hargly ſtand to it. 

Flo. Try us, why have you the Conſcience to make Priſoners of us, 
and uſe your own fleſh and blood ſo hardly, 

Otr, Prethee Flora don't vex him. . 

Flo. Here you Storm and Rave at your Daughter, are jealous, and 
ſuſpect you know not what, ſhe, tender hearted thing, puts finger in eye 
and cryes, and:puels and pines her ſelf to nothing, for my part, 7 be- 
lieve you'l be the death of -her, ſhe will not take my-Counſel, if ſhe 
would, 'twould be the better for her. -* 

Gr;, Why, what's your Counſel, Mincks ? - 

Flo. Even to let you talk on, and.not heed it. 


(5) 
Gri, Very well; Huſwife'z be quiet and hol4 yoor Clapper ill, or 
Vie hire ſomebody to marry thee, ſhall- beat: thee' twice a day: feed 
- thee with hard Eggs and Onions, allow thee no Cloaths, but /what thou 
ſpin'it thy ſelf, and lye with thee'but once a Quarter. | 
Flo, Uncle, you ſhall ner'e chooſe a Husband for me, nor for your 
Daughter neither, if /can help it. y 

Orr. Dear Sir, mind her not, you know ſhe's a wild Wench,  andlet 
me beg you drown your Jealouſies, you but diſturb your ſelf, and-render 
me the moſt nnhappy Creature living, you know 7 have ever been all O- 
bedience, and howſoever your troubled mind may raiſe ſome fear; 
within you that / may deceive you, believe it, deareſt Sir, 1 ſo love ver» 
tue and honeſt thoughts, that all your Argus Eyes, if they were doub- 
led cou'd not keep a Watch-more ſtrictly on-me, than 1do on my 
ſelf. - ; 

Flo. Law you there now, Uncle, there's a ſpeech for you, ſhou'd you 
make ſuch a one in the Senate-houſe, we ſhould have you brought home 
apick-pack 'in Triumph, will not this content you ? 

Gri. Come, come, this won't ſerve your turns, 7 muſt have you ds 
as I will, and Miſtreſs Nimble Chaps, if 7 find you do any thing to 
draw her from- her Obedience, I'le turn- you grazing upon the Cons 
mon. n 
Flo Marry, wou'd I were there once. 

Gri. [am going out, ſee ou keep good Orders within doors, I'le 
allow you the Priviledge of the Garden this Afternoon, but Ile take 
care you gad no further, come Giacomgy lock the door after you, and 


put the key in your pocket, I'Je make you know your ſelves'7hold you 
agroat. 8 5\ : 
Flo, Marry Gout go with ye, old Uncle. CExiu' Grima, - 


Otr, O Heavens! how wretched have you made the ſtate of of Wo- 
men,- you make us fair, but yet that Jewel Beauty, you ſet ſo deep on 
foyls of miſery, as if you ſtrait were angry at your ſelves, that you 
had moulded thoſe your features lovely, you' make'us ſubjet to our 
Parents humours, when Maids ; when married, to our Husband's wills ; 
and yet in either State-ſuch your Decrees, you plantin us a will to diſ6- 


bey. 
Vertue muſt bear me up, —_ to Fate,” 
1 can be good, although unfortunate. 


F/o. Moſt Phyloſophically concluded, Cofin, - you'l ner'e be: worth 
the Bread you eat, tiltyou leave making of ſpeeches. 

Otr. O Flora, would 7 had balf thy Mirth. ' 

Fo, I cannot ſpare a Dram of mine, butif you will go down into ' 
the Garden, Ile teach you how to get ſome of your own, if you will be 
ruled, .come, come, away; if you tarry here, you'l be making of more - 
ſpeeches, 


Ov. 


(6) 
- Otr. I ſhould dye, were it not for thee, and yet dee' ye hear, you 
- ſhould not talk ſo to my Father, it is not handſom. 
Flo. O' Madam, there is along ſcore driving on, he-and 7 mult reck- 
. on for that at laſt, Come pray lets go. [” Exeunt ambo, 
Enter Lodovico, Proſpero, 4nd Alberto, 
Lod. Troth, Alberto, thou art the ſtrangelt fellow living, what do'ft 
. thou do with this bundle of Miſtreſſes ? 
Alb. Tle tell thee, Thave employment for them all, 
Pro, Thou do'ſt not” let them out, do'ſt thou ? 
Alb. No, Sir, nor keep them at Livery neither, you were going to 
. proffer Cuſtom, 7 warrant, Ile tell you what, Gentlemen, 7 am reſol- 
ved, becauſe 7 find / am at great expence in bying Rimes and Monks 
for ſo many, 7 will invite them all to a Collation, and there before you 
two, I'le make my choice, or if / havecauſe enough to take pet, 7 will 
Jeave them off. 
,Lod, A rare way, but art thou in Love with ſo many Women ? 
Alb. Yes, as much as a man need to be with ſo many, [ belicye you 
arcinLove as [am too. 
Lod, Troth, not ſo much, though that be as litle as need be, 7 dread 
a Woman as /doan Adder, and think them all Laplanders, they muſt 
.clap a ſtrong ſpell upon my heart, er'c it renders, what think you, Prc- 


"Ai Why, 1 think you and Alberto will be married both of a day; 
To you can love no Woman in earneſt, and he loves all Womenia 
eſt, 

Alb, Marry e'ne like enough z and ler me rell you, Gentlemen, { have 
-a Miſtreſs that ſhall be nameleſs, whom TI love above all the reſt, but 
monſtrouſly for her good qualities. | : 

Pro. Pre'thee what are they ? 

Alb. Why, ſhe calls Names and ſells Bargains the beſt of any Gentle- 
aoman about the Town, 

Pro. Who is't has theſe exccllent Endowments. 

Alb. Nay, ſoft there, I'le not cry Roſt-meat ; J keep her for my ſelf. 
Come Gentlemen, where will you go for two-or three hours, 7 have a 
great mind to be merry this Afternoon ? | 

L od, Go to the Tavern, where our C/ub 4s, and Ile be there within 
this hour ; 7 have a little buſineſs here. | TE 
_  Alb,-\\way then, come, Proſpero. [| Ex, Bib, andPro. 

Led. I wonder Franciſco comes not, /cou'd wiſh he wou'd diſappoint 
me, 7 wou'd forgive him with. all my heart, and there were not a Wo- 
man in the-bufinels, tis ten-to.onche wou'd, burrow he will be roo pun- 


tual. F-3 L239" 0 
| Ms - © Enter Franciſco. 


-See, he.comes, Franciſco, you may perceive how juſt Iam tq my-pro- 
miſe, [am here before ye.; are youready? Fra, 


(7) 


Fra Thitizs dear Lodovico, Tam'prepared, I met the old "Ma 
Streets off, he is ſfe : {tay here and watch till r; g0 in and fetch her bat 
will nor be two minutes now, till I am happy. My beſt Lodovico, "Dn 
1am obliged to ye. | [Exit Fran, 

Lod, That is as it happens, pox on this Clatterwauling, were / bound. 
Prentice to theſe Amorous Employments, 1 ſhould han myſelf in one 
Moneth to get out of my time ; Now mult 7 ſet my C 1aps4n order to - 
ſay ſome fine thing to the Woman; let's ſee, 1'le ask her when ſhe was - 
af at the Tennis- Court : miſchief on't, 7 ſhall be abſurd do what Ican: 
no matter, when. / get off her, Ile ever after ſorſwear coming near h 
Woman, off having any thing to- do with a Womans Buſineſs : They. 
come, ha ! how now, athin Tears, | 

Enter Franciſco, pulling *n Otrante, Flora follows. 

Otr. Good Sir, as you had a Mother, -pitty my Youth anddonot blaſt © 
mino honour. , | 

Flo. Unhand her, uncivil Raſcal, if 7 had but as much as a Fire-ſhs.. - 
vel, 1 would daſh out thy Brains. 

Otr, Peace, Flore.. Tknow you are a Gentleman for Heavensſake, + 
free me, ask what Ranſom you will, it ſhall be yours. 

Flo, A Halter for him ; ſee what a hanging-look he-has, the Gallows -: 

oans for him. 


Lod, 1don't underſtand this, 
Fra, lask no Ranſom, 'tis your ſelf 1 covet; and ſince Fortune has + 


fo befriended me, to put you into my hands, Ile make uſe of the bene-. 
fit, and make you mine. 

Flo, You ſhall be hanged firſt, you. ſtinking Varlet, I'te raife the © 
Town upon the;. and make the Apple - Woman brain thee with: 
Codlings. 

Orr, O'Sir, for Heavens: ſake, if there be any thing you prize, or 
here or there, for that fair fake diſmiſs me now ; or if my Maiden-tears - 
cannot prevail ſo much, be but ſo good to kill me, I'« forgive you free- - 
ly, and thank you. 

Fra. 1 will not hurt thee, fair one, nor intend I to fix a ſtain opon -: 
thy Maiden-honour, I mean to marry you. | 

Flo, Thou ſhalt eat her as ſoon,” thou Hell-hound'------. take me. . 
Thave not ſo much as a Bodkin about me, if I had I would — 

Orr. If you force me to that, it will be &'n as bad ; for I ſhall never - 
love yeifconſtrained, 'pray letme go, were it not better Court me like 
a Gentleman, 1am gentle natur'd; and where I am won by ſweetneſs, -. 
can love dearly ; but where I am forced, Phate as badly. . 

Fra. I muſt leave that to the venture, 7 will not forgo acertainty to > 
feed on fickle Hopes: Come, you muſt away... 

Orr, O Heavens! is there no help? - 


lo, Help, help, help... C 
Ft p, help, help Led! 


(8) 
Led. Pre'thee, Franciſco, what means this ? Did you not tell me 
ſhe was willing ? . 

Fra, Why, you ſee ſhe is, only her Kinſwoman there, was not ac- 
quainted with the deſign, pre'thee go {top her Larme. * 

Lod. But I heard the Lady cry out too, ſee, ſhe weeps there too,ſure 
all is not well. | 

Fra. All's well, I tell you, 'tis but alittle fright, Thee's pleaſcd for all 
theſe Clouds, pre'thee go lead that little Tempeſt there. | 

Flo, Tle run out and fetch ſome body, or elſe Tle bawl.my Throat 
out. | 

Lod, Hold,good furious Gentlewoman,your Kinſwomgn is pleas'd, 
and though you were not acquainted with the plot, it was of her 
own laying ; the Gentleman is a perſon of Quality and Honour, and 
at his Houſe you will will find a reception fit .for .the Kinswoman. of 
his Miſtreſs. | res 

Flo. What a naſty ill-bred Puppy art.thou, to tell me ſuch a no- 
torious lye to my face, you are his Comrade, it ſeems, adviſe your fel- 
low-Raſcal to quit us as he loves his Neck-joynt, you Cowardly 
Curs, you durit as well be hang'd as meddle with Mea with Swords 
in their hands, now.you have got us in your pound you ſtrut like two 
Crows over a gutter : Conſider and be harg'd; for if you don't, and 
let us go, you will be hang'd, ' 

Led. So, now [ have pull'd, and old houſe upon.my head, in my 
Conſcience, this ſhould be Alberro's Miſtreſs, by her calling -of 
Names, but indeed, pretty Gentlewoman. *tis very true, ask the 
Lady. | 

'Flo. Ask a halter, thou Mungrel, thou wilt make me ſcratch 
thee by and by, do what I can, 

Lod. Sure I am deceived, ſee the Lady weeps ſtill, hark you 
Eranciſco, Lam half perſwaded you hayeaþuſed me, the Lady can- 
not he willing, | 

Orr, Willing, to what, Sir? 

. Ld, To. go with the Gentleman, +» 

Orr, Willing, alaſs, I am forced, baſely conftrain'd, good Sir, if 
you own any thing called Noble, compaſſionate my fad (condition, 
and free me from the fear of lofing that to. which all life and For- 
4unc's but a trifle. 

; Lad..Is this true ? 

Fra,” No; no ; why, what is" it neat? come, let's lead them off 
quickly. - 

Lod. Nay, if it be ſo, ls ſhall notbeled. off. 

Fra. Shall not ? EY 05f; ING | 

Led, No, ſh:ll not; thovgh Lnever was-in Love, 1do not lik 

pos: > 


| (9) 
-to ſee a Woman abuſed, that does not deſerveit, I ſay they ſhall not be 
cart d away again(t their wills. : 
"Fra. 1do not underſtand that Language, 
'Lod, Lay I will ſee them ſafe back again. 
"Fra. An I ſay, I willcarry them away without your help, which 
you ſhall ſee, if youlive long enough. ; 
''Lod; Try that. - [Fight, Lodovico «drives Franciſco off. 
Orr, Thus was a.Noble /part. 
Flo. What a Slut was I forcalling Names, 
| Emer Lodovico. | 
'Lod, Fortyne ſometimes Crowns the juſt Sword, Ladies y'are free, 
I'le lead you back again, I am glad it was my fortune to do you this ſer- 
_— 7. 
- Orr. Andit was a Noble one, a-thing fo done, no time will make the 
ſtory old by telling, you will be Tutor to the furure age. And who- 
-ſoever wou'd doa Noble deed hereafter, muſt begin from your Ex- 
ample. | 
- Led... Pray Madam, ſpare the Complement, If 1 did well, the 
Deed rewards the doing, I am-ſomething rough, unus'd to your ſoft- 
Sex, I cannot ſay I didit for your ſakes, cauſe you are Women, if you 
had been men, I muſt-have don't, I could not have endur'd toſeca 
pod day abuſed, Madam, you ſee I am no Courtier, nor er'e like to 


' Flo. No by my troth, not after this rate. | 

Orr, ; How exe it was, Lam ſure my gratitude requires me to pay a 
Tribute of conſtant thanks, may I not know from whom my reſcus 
comes, for I have friends that uſe not to be ſluggiſh in the acknowledg- 
meat of. ſuch favours, | 

Led.-Faith Madam, no Womamnever knew my name but my Lan- 

dreſs; the truth is, I am unfitto be known of Women, I care not much 
for any of them, and [ am ſure they will not care for me, 

. Or, Sure, Sir; you think usſtrange Creatures, 

\ Lod, Fai hl will believe you tobe any thing rather by the half, than' 


try. | . 
Fe Sure, Iſhou'd know the Gentleman, it ſhould be he by his dif- 
courſe Alberto has told me of, 
Led. \yill, you pleaſe to walk -in, Ile fee you ſafe within your 
Walls, and take ty leave, for 1 have buſineſs preſſes me, | 
Otr, Your ſervant, Sir. 

[He leads them in, and'comes out again, 
Lod, The Devils in't, that I ſhould have ſuch an adventure, to be 
thrown ypon a Woman alone, this -Lady'sa pretty toy, O my Con- 
ſcierice I'could Tove her as much as I cou'd any body, and as long, that 
is to ſay (for time,) half a minute, and as much as comes to _— 
at's 


BE. 
(10) | 2 
that's my comfort fill, Well, but Frewiſe, Tnever thovpht the 
 had'ſt =. ſo unworthy, for truſt me, ifl had, this breaſt of onda 
never harbour'd any kindneſs for thee, henceforth thou art no more my 
friend, I ſcorn to leve that man that loves buſineſs more than me. But 
I forget Preſpero and Alberro wait for 


OH 3 I muſt net break my word. 
with them. &, 


. CS CE. 
G on gee Giacomo. TS 
Gri, Stay, tay, let alone, Vle go in at the back-door, may be I'm 
ſurpaſs my two Goſſips. G F oof 
Gia, Faith I cen pity theſe two. young Gentlewoman, they have 
a very heavy hand here with my old r, | 
Enter Grimani &ying ont. 
Gri, Thieves, Rogues, Villains; my Daughter, my Neece, a falſe 
key, the door open, undone, undone. | 
Gia, What's the matter, Sir ? 
Gri, They're run away, they're gon: 
Gia. Were you within, Sir? | Re: 
Gri. No, Fool, what ſhoutd1 go in for, when the door was open? 
- *Tis too true, I ſhall run mad, ſtark ſtareing mad, , = 
Gri. Pray be/quiet, Sir. - Ne h 
Gri. Rogue, bid me be quiet, when my Davghter loft ? my fami- 
ly diſgrac'd, and my houſe ruin'd,/ take that. 
Gia, O, Sir, O: why, look Sir, look yo, de'e ſee, th'are here. 
uy Enter Otrante and Flora. ' '- © © 
Iknew as well as if 1 had been.jn their bellies, that they never intend-. 
"ed to run away. 1 2c} cad cad 1 5 
Otr. We guſſed we heard your loud voice, Sir. | 
Gri, O, are you come, 'tis well, you have put me ina ſweet ight, 
you have been playing of fine. ganibols here: How came this door 
open? Who has beenhere ?- Ha; ſpeak; tell 'me quickly, -- + 
Otr, I have a ſtory full of truthias worider, by that time yon had 
left us half an hour, my Colin-and* myſelf walkt into the Garden, 
where, aa y Ao manat the back-door*eame in, we know nor how, 
ſeiz'd me and forc'd me out with him, cryes nor intreaties could pre- 
vail, but came back empty, as. thatair receiv'd them till one, (whom 
to'ther brought for his aſſiſtance, betray'&into the - Aftion,, by his pro. 
fefling it was with my conſent,) broughttimely aid, and nobly did rea. . * 
ſtore us to our freedom, 34-0 OY 7 
Gri, Is this true ? I 
Flo, You might have whiſtled for us elſe e're this time. 
Gri, Do you know them ? Orr, No, neither of them. 
Gri, 'Tis well, go get you into your Chambers, I'le no more.Gar- 
den walking, {OO ; 


Gia, 


| SA 
" Gia, And Had you like to-have been run away wi 

Flo. A org h NG Coons . | , A Noereſs? 

' Gia. Alack the day, what apitiful thing was tha Nn 
little Itch to be going? _ a ning thats! had.-not you.s 

Flo, No, Good-man Logger-head. 

Gri. Come, Giacomo, up to your Chambers, Bop 
; Exit Gri. and Gi 

Flo, Iam confident that I know who the Gentleman was, it = 
be he by Averiy's diſcrigtion, | | 

Orr, Name him, good Flora, name him. 

Flo, Why, hisname is, let me ſee, Lodovico, I, Lodovice, 

Orr, What is he? Flo. Fknow not what. 

Orr, Well, be he what he will be, heis a noble fellow, if I do &'re 
love any, methinks it. ſhould be he. Bleſs me, what Rorms attend 
6n humanelives, and toſs our fortunes upon troubled waves? Wit, 
Wealth, and Beauty, are but ſlender Twins, who ail with them be- 
ſure the Cordage cracks, | 
And does betray the Cozen'd Boat toqyracks. 

Yet may we lancli by night (through rude and dark) * 
Anadride it out, ;if vertue guide the Bark. | 

.- .... +:  - , Actus Sceundus, Enter Pietro «1d Peſauro, | 
Peſ. | Yar" Fietro, trading is gead, that's truth on't. 

Pje, The. want on's will bury me alive, I think, for my 
part, I have beenout of uſe fo long, Iam ready to turn honeſt, and 
xclaluerodyeinit, .. TRIS _ 

- Peſ., 'Tis hard, men will not carry money about them enough for 
ſuch poor folks as we to live on. F 

- #4, The very Uſurers too (a pox upon them) tough they live on 
Candles ends, and rotten Apples, will lay out money for ſtrong Bolts 


and Locks, 
Peſ. But rather let them ruſt, then ſpend a Dinner-in Oy, *tis wiſ- 


dom, their bags do ſleep the ſurer. 
Pie, Wou'd we had the wakeing of ſame of them, OT could play 

themſuch a Huntſup,not ſo much as adoublet ſtirring, or a thread-bare 

Coat for's to be lowſy in, no Sheet, or Shirts upon the hedges, ſure 


all people begin toleave off wearing Linnen'? 
Peſ. Why then they will come into out faſhion, *tis ſtrange, I that 


have been a-Souldier, ; 
Pie. And twice ſtrapadod for running from your Colours, . 


Pe:{. Would be aſhamed. 
Pie. To look an Enemy in the face. 
Peſ. To think of theſe poor trifles, 1 do aim at ſomething fax 


higher, 
Pie, The Gallows : and may come to it. 
SY Pf 


( 12.) 
Peſ. For when 1confider, Pie. How well you deferve it, 
Peſ. That men are born. - Pie. Sometimes to be hang'd.” © 
Peſ. Miſtake me not,to be Commanders of the World and Fortune 
too, I ſcorn to think of hunger, I trample upon cold. | 
Pie, That is, you walk bare-foot in the ſtreets, do'ſt ſee this houſe, 
here lives a rich old fellow,Grimani,a Senator, that has more bags than 


brains, what if we two fliould contrive to eaſe him of the care and trou- 
ble of keeping ſome of thoſe brats. 


Peſ. And we take them to Nurſe. ES 

Pie. Right, we have ſome pretty little Triakets left, we'l wrench 
a Bar or pick a Lock for a ſhift, _ © | 

Peſ. Come, let's about it. 

Enter Franciſco. 

Pie, Not too haſty, good Peſauro, let's conſider on't. 

Fre, Bob'd of my Miſtreſs, and bafled by a fellow 1 ___ to help 
me, it galls my beart-ſtrings, pox on his Puppet honour, before I have 


done I'te make him rue his honeſty, and wiſh that he had been more a 
knave than I am. 


Peſ. Shal's do it to night ?-” 
Pie. If things hit right man, -See, who's that ? 
Fra. I'le have the Woman too, or miſs my aim. - I only want ſome 


Inſtruments to employ, and ſuch as I may be affured are truly Roguey, 
for Ile ne're truſt an honeft man again. 


Pie. Sure the Gentleman comes to ſpeak with us. 

Fra. Nor will I ever be honeſt henceforth my ſelf. 

Pie, Heark, Peſauro, our Trade will come into credit ſhortly. 
Here's a Gentleman Rogue, would he would erhploy us, he looks this 
way.. | 

Fro, Ha ? What are theſe? They look like as arrant Raſcalsas ever 
groan'd under a Gibbet, Ile try, may be Fortune is kind to ſend them 


to me, de'e ye hear, ſcare Crows, what are you two, if a man may be 
ſs bold to ask you ? | 


Pie, We are two very poor fellows: 
Peſ. Very hungry fellows too. 
Fra, And very lowſy. 
Pie. Indifferently, and it like your Worſhip. 
Fre. Why then you are without a Metaphor, two very poor hungry 
lowſy Rogues, are you not? : 
Pef. Troth, Sir, you are a notable gueſſer, we are ſo; 
Fre. Why then here is for you, be Rogues ftill. 
[Gives them Money. , 
Pie. Good Sir, we are Thieves, Rogues, Pick-pockets, Shirks, 
Cheats, Pimps, we have all the Querks, and Nicety of Roguery, 
Prigging; Maunding, Padding, Milling, all, all, Sir. i] 
: , r 3 


(13) h 

Fra, Excellent-Varlets, there's more money for you, get you better 
Cloaths, and each of you a Sword, I have employmeut for-you, where- 
in, if you behave your ſelves handſomly, you ſhall taſt more of; my 
bounty.- 

Pie. If we do not, cut our throats. 

Fra, Can you break a Houſe well? 

Pie, Rarcly, wecan creep in at a Cat-hole. 

Fra. Can you killa man I have a mind to be: rid of ? 

Peſ. To a heir, Sir, name him, he's dead already. 

Fra. And can you keep your tongues till ? 

Pie, You ſhall carry them in-your little pocket. 

Fre, Well, you are for my turn, meet mehere ſome two hours 
hence, le give you dire&ions and more money. 

Pie. We will not fail you, Sir. CExit Fran, 
©, Peſauro, what were we born to ? I was once in the mind to haveleft 
my- profeſſion, but now I would not leave being a Rogue, to bea 
Senator, come, we mult keep ,two ſtrings to our Bow for all that, 
aſp yellow boys won't out of my head, let's view the: Houſe a 

ittle, ; 
Enter Lodovieo,- Proſpero, and Alberto. 
+ Lod, That's the very houſe; , 
Alb. That, why there lives my Miſtreſs, was not there little ſhe 
Þiece of Ordinance near the Lady that you reſcued ? % 

Lod, There was, and by your deſcription, ſhe ſhould be your Mi- 
 ftreſs, Alberte.. ." 

Alb. Why, ſo ſhe is, if you had told me on't before, I cov'd have 
ſatisfied you that Franciſo bad no intereſt in Orrante. | 

Peſ. Look, Pietro, Ihope there be ſome more Gentlemen Rogues, 
let us accoſt them. 

Pro, See,what are thoſe that look as if they were going to be coyned 
into paper? 

Pie, Gentlemen, . do you want any Rogues ? 

Peſ. Seignior, Sir, land my Comrade are couple of Vagabonds, 
that deſire to be civil to any Gentleman that comes into our Compa= 
ny. FI 

Pro, You impudent Raſcals. 

Pie. Right, weare ſo. : og 

Alb. De'e ye long. to have. us wait upon you to the whipping. 

oft, ; 
« Pie, We ſhall be loath to put you to thattrouble Gentlemen, come, _ 
Peſauro, let's be joggi , thofe Gentlemen are not for us, they are ill 
bred, «they are honeſt ſtill though it beout of fafhion. Ei 

Led. Dogs, you'l vaniſh, won't ye, or elſe muſt we loſe time in - 
kicking of you? - "Y 


(14) 
-P;e.” Your Servants, Sir, your Seryants. [Ext Piet. and Peſauro. 

Pro, Heark you, 1odovico, pray take a friends advice, and have a 
vigilant eye ſtill to _ you know Franciſco's nature to be fierce, 
hor, and revengeful, and his late behaviour confirms he dares'attempt 
things baſe enough. : 

Lod, 1thank your care, but I am too old to fear, if he attempt me 
ſingle, my Sword ſhows how to bring me off; and I cannot believe he 
has ſo quite lay'd aſide'Nobleneſs, as to ſurprize me with odtls, 

| x [Flora at the' door. 

Pro. Iwilh it be ſo. 

Alb. Look, yonders my Miſtrefs, Ile beck to her to come to us. 

Lod, No, pre'thee don't, I'le be gon if youdo, I had enough of her 
lately. be 

Alb Will you never be reconcil'd to a petticoat ? 

Lod. Not in the mind Iam in, | 

' Alb. And thou had'ſt any grace to make thy ſelf a fortune, thou 
woud'ft court this Weuch, ſhe cannot in gratitude but love thee 


pre'thee Court her. ' 


Lod. Ilefell pudding-pics firſt. 
F G 3 ' Emer Flora. F 


Alt. look, my Miſtreſs comes, ſay the word, and Ile break your 
, L 


mind to her. 
Led. Tle break your head, and youdo Come, Proſpero,pre'thee let's 
be-going.. - _ | 
Bo Shy de'e make ſuch haſt away, Sir, here's no- body will bite 
any” =" | * | \$..5 bale 
: Lod. Good ſharp Lady, let me goin quietneſs : tell you Fam not fit 
- for your Company, I'le leave Alberto with you : methinks one fhou'd 
be enough for you. [Exit Lod. and Prof. 
Flo. He's a noble fellow, but of a ſtrange humour, will he not endure 
any Womans Company ? GS ; y wo, 
Alb. He has a perfect Antipathy to them, hishair ſtands an' end, and 
he ſweats when heſees them; I have been perſwading him'to-addreſs 
hiraſelf to Orrante, he ſwears he will beg butrer-milk' firſt; Ihave no 
hopes ever to make him ſand nearer a Woman, than the people do to 
the ſtake at a bear-baiting, unleſs I can make him parcel.drunk ſome 
night, and invite him into a Bawdy-houſe, -Iam ſure he will ne're 
core to a parley with an honeſt Woman, © No, 'tis,. a fitange fel- 
low. 2M ; © RO | 
Flo. 1 wonder at him. See, here cones ry Colin, 
| Enter Otrante. 
.Orr, Seignior Aberto, your Servant: -How came you hither? ' 
Alb. I'was walking with the hirave"Sir Rnipht that 'kifled the Dra- 
g52n, and reſcued the Lady, you kn»w who [ mean, who. for allhis 
Valour, fl:d at firſt fight ot your Colin, Or: 


(13) 
Otr. Do'she hate all the Sex ? Was not his Mother a Woman ? Has 
"ke no Siſters ? 

Alb. Never had any, and his Mother dy*d in Childbed of him; te 

hates them all perfectly, I | 
Orr.l amſorry for't, for trult me I believe he js of an excellent Temper, 

Alb. He's an honeſt brave fellow, and as fair a drinker, Tle ſay that 
for him,gs ever toffed a Tankard, he has no more gall in him then a Gnar. 
Faith Madam, . wou'd you had him, that is all the harm I wiſh him. 

Orr. I am beholding to you, you would have me tycd to one that's 
ſure to hate me. 

Alb, -And you werein a bed together, you wou'd ſoon convince him 
of hiserror, Madam, your Servant, my pretty Miltreſs, wheamuſt - 

and I have alittle loving diſcourſe ? 

Flo, Next time wemeet, we'l talk on't. 

Alb.- Well, fare you well, I nwſt go follow Lodovico. 

;'Fle, Ofare you well, Sir. [Ex# Alberto. 

Orr, I cannot get this Gentleman out of my mind, I am never well 
but when I think upon him; ſpeak Coſin, was't not a noble gallant paſ- 
ſage, a thing quite out of the Road of common Gallantry ? 

Flo. What? 

- Oer- Why, Lodovice's reſcuing of 1s? did'ſt mark with what a 
ſprightly air and noble garb he behaved himſelf ? 

Flo, Sit's the Wind there ? why, it was well enough, he's # good 
thraſhing fellow, but I haveſeen a Butcher at a wake, do more execu- 
tion with a Battoon, wh 
- Or And pre'thee give me thy opinion,is he not a very handſom man? 
." Flo, He has a pretty good cudgeling face, put himaltogether, the 
man is a man, and that's all can be ſaid of him : but did you mark how 
readily he talk't ? 

Orr. Me-thinks he talk't bravely. 

Flo, Fam fure 'twasvery bluntly. Ile lay my life ſhe's in love with 
him, 7 hope itis ſo, "twill cure her of her melancholy, and if I can teach 
her but alittle ſpight betwixt us, we'l ſo order this old/Father of hers, 
that we'l either make him dye quickly, or bring fim to uſe us better. 

Orr, Tknow not” what's the matter, bur I feel ſomething within me 
like the thing called Love, 'tis ſo, 1 find Ilove him, and that extreamly, 
but I do find withall, that I muſt be the woer, for Lodovico's humour is 
ſuch, he never will Court me. 1 have thought upon a way, the Fryer, 
he is not out of the Houſe yet, he ſhall doit, and yet he ſhall not nei- 
ther, and yet he ſhall too, 1 will not truſt Flors, and he is the. fit- 
teſt, for he ſhall do it, and yet not know he does it. Hark, Flora, 
ſtep.in and oall the Fryer quickly, make haſt, or he will be gone, tellhim 
I wov's ſpeak one word mare with him. - 

. Flo. 1g0, Madam, Onmy Conkience ſhe's plotting; there's _ 


\ 


\ 


\" 


(16) 

hope of her now. \- TE 

Der. Ifind that Love has given mea ſtrange Cog EE. 
are at work, if all things hit, | | 
I'le ſwear misfortune makes the keeneſt wig. 

Enter Frye 

Fri, Wou'd yoy ought _ me Daughter? 

Ctr. Yes, Father, one thing more I thought to tell you, in whi 
am to beg your belt aſſiſtance to help reſtore = to my _ [FRY 

Fri, Why, is there any diſturbs i ? . 

Orr, Alas, there is, Father, I preſume you know Seignior Lodovice, 
FE Fri, I do, but he's a man ſo full of-vertue, and has an humour eftran- 
ges him ſo much to thoughts of women, I cannot think him guilty, 

Orr; Believe it Sir, that's but a fair pretence to hide his looſe deſires 
and veil his buſineſs, (that I ſhou'd thus help a man to make him love 
me.) Know then he has oft attempted on my honour, by ſecret bribes, 
Letters, and Meſſages, all whith 1 till return'd him back with ſcorn, 
yet he on ſome falſe grounded hopes perliſts,and did no longer than the 
1aſt night. bribe one of my ſervants to convey this rich bracelet upon 
my EO | 

Fri, Is he an Impoſter then? I'le make him an —_—— | 

*Otr, But uſe not too much violence at firſt,for my ſoft nature cannot 
well endure to have him ſuffer, in life.or fame, perhaps if you will em- 
ploy your Authority, he may deſiſt, and: then] could forgive, Good 
father give him back his bribe, and tell him, chaſt minds :do ſcorn the 
aſſaulrs of all temptations, tell him | mean but to ſee him once more, 
andthat upon his knees to ask me mercy, the ſooner he does this, the 
better wrongs like mine,expect aquick ſubmiſſion. Each minutes ſtay 
does aggravareafreſh, but neglect will make me throw off patience, 
and ftrive to ruin him, I meant to pardon. 

Fri, Daughter, take you nocare, Ile tell him home your mind, 1 
am'to ſee him within this hour, when, you meet hin next, I hope you 
will find him-an alter'd man. Tn as a; 

Otr. Thope ſo too, Father, HS: | 

Fri, Farewel Danghter. | LExit Fryer. 

Orr. Indeed 1 ' ope I fhall, but not. as you mean, Fryer, Sure Lo- 
dovico nas wit enough to underſtand: my meaning, _ 

| | Enter Flora. 
How now, Confin? - ROY 0262 ty APA 

Flo, Your Father ſtamps andſtares, and callsfor you, 

Oty. Why, let him call on, and fume on, there's no great heed to 
- be taken on't, do I ſpeak right, Flora ?» s 

Flo' Mait excellent, - where por you this ſpirit ? 

Orr. No matter, thou ſee'lt 1have. it, I tell thee, Flora, I am 
like: to prove a great Politician, I have. deſigns afoot will make mad 
work, 1 have abus'd the Fryer molt wickedly, Flo, 


| (17) 
-Fte. As how, dear Colin? : | | 
Orr, My joys.have almoſt made me betray my elf ; ſhe muſt not 
WL RT Ln, LAfae, 
Gri. withm, Otrante, Daughter,  - 

Orr, Heark,. my Father calls, Icome, Sir, 

Flo, Well, but your deſign, Coſin. 

Orr, 1cannot ſtay to tell thee now. 

| Emer Grimans. 
Look, look, my Father, we muſt make up. our mouths,-I ſce his 
eyes are charg'd with hail-ſhot atlealt, w2 

Gri, Very well, Gentlewomen, I muſt come and-fetch ye, muſt I; 
is this your duty and obedience? I'te ney o a and your Cofin Coun- 
cellor ſmart for this, 1 hold you a groat, before I have done with you. 

Flo. Hold, good Uncle, pray take heed, you will loſe your wind 
elſc with-runing ſo faſt of the ſcore. v4 EN 

Grs, You poultry prating puppet, do you take liberty to abuſe me 
coy face itill, methinks you might be content to do't bthind my 
© Flo, There were no ſportin that, Uncle. | | 
Gri, Why, mult I be your May-game, Gymcrack? De'e ye tear 
me,you Gillflurt ; leave your giggling and your flowting, or.l will ſend 
you toa Cloyſter.totame ye. | | 

-Flo, I ſhall make a mad Nun, you will quickly have me return'd up- 
on. your hands, Uncle, 

Otr. Pre'thee &,: Flora. 

Gri, Come hither, Orrante, that you may ſee Thave a Fathers kind- 
ndſs = care toſce you well diſpos'd of ; I have provided you a noble 
matc : , 

* Orr, -Heavenforbid'! who is it, Sir? $350 

Gr, One that has wealth, and will maintain thee bravely. 

Orr, Tam in no great haſt, Sir, tam well content tobe as yetT 


am, 

Gri. Why, thisis very fize,” thou fooliſh Girl : do as I wou'd have 
thee, orl'le give thee never a-groat,; diſpoſe your ſelf to lovehim : 
'tis Villanore the brave rich Senator, 

Flo, What, the man with the Noſe, Uncle ? : 

Gri, Huswife, won't you be quiet yet, him I have pitch'd upon to 
be thy Husband, and I muſt have you chuſe with my eyes. 

_ ” rate they were out,. though I pawn'd a petticoat to buy a 

dog-bell, 

Gr. Alaſs, he is 01d, how ean,you think my years ſhould let me ſuit 
my temper to his humour ? 

Gri. Come, come, leave your tittle tattle ; I'te have it fo, Iam re- 
ſolr'd on't, and will be obey'd, de'e mark me, 1'le-leave you a — to 

; D en 


PRE NY 
$2 (8) ay 
chew ypon the Cud, 4 | "Exit Grim, 

Flo, ive you joy, Coz, you arelike AO RETIR | rapdory- 
your bed-fellow. BE OT 

Orr, Tlelye with an old-houſe- end as foon. * 

Flo, Now muſt you have your face ſwept over- every hour; with 2 
leſſon of fourſcore : come, 'tis done, you muſt ſettle to work, and learn 
to make Night-Caps. | | f 

Orr. Come,'tis not done, nor never ſhall be;1'le, be hang'd e're I wed 
that old Chimney-piece :' this kas new fir'd me, now Famrefolv'd, Ile 
cither have Lodovico, or lead Apes. ; 

Flo. How, Coſin, what's that you ſay of Lodovico ?- 

Orr. I of Lodovico! Idid not name Lodevice (this blabbing tongue 
of mine, I cou'd bite it offnow,) ET EE508 SOL TISOLLIG 

Flo, Nay, ne're mince the matter, you did ſprak of Zodevico, and 
what is more, you do love Zodovico, neverdeny it; I know it certainly, 
and I muſt tell/you I'do not take it kindly, you thou'd hide it from me. 

Orr. This unlucky Wench has found it out I ſee, there is no halting 
before a Cripple : Well, Cofin, I will confeſs then, *Tis true, I do love 
wa and. that with ſuch a doting paſſion, Fam aſham'd ont, but cannot 

- 1f, | | "_ | 41 
| Zlo Ne're bluſh for the matter, "tis the wiſeſt thing you have done 
theſe two dayes: but how will you contrive it, for he's a perfe&t wo- 
man hater ? wb +10 . 

Otr, That I conſider'd,, and therefore did reſolve to wooe him firſt ; 

inorder, to which ] have ſent him a Token and a Meflage, but a'mad 


” Flo. By whom, dear Madam? © © 

Orr. Bythe Fryer, Floys -* de'e mark the Fryer, , 

Flo. The Devil you did as ſoon, 'do.Church-men intrench upon the 
Chamber-maids prerogative ? Nay then------- Fe\1'd 
- Orr. 'Tis fo, come in, Tle tell thee all the plot. 

Flo. Well,.I fee. we, Women are like Horſes, we. know not our own 
ſtrength, till ye be in Love. ward wad 1 


Orr, 1 was a fool, but will not be fo ſtill; . . 
I am a Woman, and muſt have my will.” © 
"Flo,. Well Rimed, . Colin, | 
x |  [CExit.ambs 


ye Euter Franciſco, Pietro and Peſauro, | 
Fra. 1n ſhort, I meanto ſarprize Grimanis Daughter'this next night : 
you tell me you have Inſtruments to brake into the houſe, 
Pie, We'l ſet you in as ſoftly as it were at the door. 
Fra.,, What prize you find befides, is your own, | allow.it you alaw- 


ful booty. _ 


. 


.Peſ. A noble Gentleman. 7 
| | #74, 


of I 

Fra. But firſt, [ have another Doegentenahyt forTainy 8 fondo 
#66:? TUOY 2010! el AT 9 

i Pae. Ya. Sir by hehe 1.do.; (1; L010 THIS 
Fra. Why: then go find biin-alas, givehjm this papet Hoi me, -knd 
bring me his anſwer ; 'tis a Challenge to meet-me to morrdw 'mornirlg, 
where when he comes, you mult bexcadyro'difpatch him;'!1 wyill-be 
there and help youy take haftarid hain & mie an account: iithe Fven- 
ing. [Pietro guns, (nnd ebit Lou #1 ers pot hirh. 


,Ewer. LoGbaed: 
Led, Fragtiſco ' Y "i 


Bra, Lodeveco;now l:ſhill rothonmich you for your laſt kindneſs 
Led. Baſe O_—_ you ſhall buy me dearly. 
167 1520; Bater” ah 2 Alberto," drives off the x ec | 
ovico diſarms Franciſco, Ht 9-2 GON 
Fra, Have I no fortune ? 
wwd.; Now Sir, your WES ; ode azyou are, hk it, and 
take. is; %3 
|; Fra Nos you ſhall : neetagadelactes ofamgic:! > - -10 20 
is Chl ;far alt that; to: ſhow'how nach 7 ſcorn to 'he? "beſt 
ou; and know not how ito feat you; ther's your Sword: but 7 
= _? adviſe you to uſe both your Courage'and that more handſom- 


"Bra. Well, Lodovico, you force a, though againſt the hair, to 
ſay you are noble; but notywithitanding let me tell you, | hate you, and 
ſo fare you well. 1: (Err Franc. 

| CProf. ang Alb. comes 11 at theſe words, 

Lod. The World, I ſee; cannotwin him to be honelt. Gentlemen, 
I thank you for your'timely. aid, andnow 'tis over, Ile tell you what 
an adventore I bave had with an: old F fryer: rTP now: dee ſee this 
Bracelet. 

Pro; How came you by it; "tis a richione?. 

Led. Fle tell you 5; meeting with my Confefir, he took me aſide, 
and there began to ſchool me;told me it was unworthy to pretend a hate 
1 Women, and yet under that miask endeavour the:ruin. of a Ladics 

onour. = 

Ath. Thou a Womans honour, Ile-be hang'd if thou knowelt a 
Maid from a Movufe' trap. .:: 

Lo, That 1 had oftenſent herLetters and Bribes, amongſt the reft 
laſt night this very Bracelet : amaz'd (as well I might) I denyed all, yet 
he believed not, but replyed, -The Lady Thad abuſed, thus vowed, un- 
eſs I came my ſelf and begg'd her pardon on my knees, ſhewou'd diſ- 
cover all my praQtiſes, and leave.ne open to her kindreds vengeance. 
This he advis'd me to, or expect'what followed, and ſo he lefr me, and 

wou'd not be diſabus'd, "-D 2 Pre, 


—_—_—"" " 

- Pro. Do you know her name ?- 
Led. . He did not tell-it me, and I was ſo -amaz'd I forgot to ask it; 
Alb. This is ſome young Wench that has a mind to forgive thee 

for iy mo upon her own appointment, and let thee lye with her 


to make friends:.I'le be hang'd if this bent Orrente, and my Miſtreſs at 
one end on't, it is ſo like her.. 


Led. Pifh, thou haſt the ſtrangeſt fancies, . 

Alb.. Say. the thing be as I gueſs, what ſwap will you take 'twixt my 
Miſtreſs and yours ?- come, a match. 

Led. Nay,and it were ſo,]-wou'd not be ſuch a fool as to change bot- 
toms. Mine is a luſty Veſſel, richly laden, well man'd and arm'd ; 
yours but a little.pinnace, a ſmart Saylor, I'think but of no great Ser- 
Vice, + | | | 

» Ab. She carriesa Chace-Gun. in. herfore-Caftle, makes Sea-room 
where c're ſhe rides. . 

Pro, Is ſhe ſo loud? » 

Alb. -And-when her Powder and Shot's ſpent, ſhe'l cloſe ye up to 
handy blows To lightly ; I ſaw her once boartling the Butler's ts ſhe 
$7 on all her grapling Irons together, down'went the Main- maſt, all 

e Sayls were- rent, fhg.ce'n almoſt une ſpoyId his u deck, at 


laſt-the fellow, made a lucky.ſhot, hit her. *twixt wind and-water, - 
turn'd up herkeel and got off; | 


Led, Faith, I wou'd ſhe heard you. 
Brter Flora, 
/b.: So wou'd not I for one. or two of my-ears. 
Pro. Look to it, a Sayl, ſhe's here, 
Alb, Mercy on me, here will be a plaugy ſtorm. 
Fle, You Goodman:Lockram Chaps, Heard you, Sirrah, never 
fink back, come, ſhow your buckram fate, where 'did you ſee this 
b battle betwixt me and.the Butler ?- 
Alb. Pre'thee Flora be quiet, I did but jeſt. 
Flo. But jeſt, you Mungrel, am 1 to be jeſted by with you, Sirrah ? 
. Ab. Wou'dIwere in the ſtreets; to tell you true Miſtreſs, I dream't 
of the battle before rchearſt.” © | 
Flo. Did you ſo: you dream when youare'drunk; and lye when you 
| are ſober, a hopeful Lover, Thad a dream too, | 
Alb.. After you were Drunk, Miſtrefs? - 
Flo. No, no, I dream't I was -drunk, and fell in Love with a hat- 
. chet-fac'd fellow ; ſome reſemblance he had of you, the Butler you 
dream't of was Sir" Amadis to him, methought I was told his Cardinal 


Vertues were drinking, wenching, ſwearing, lying, and for theſe heads 
many of theſe branehes firſt. 


Alb. And yet you lov'd him till.” 
Flo. Now Tam-awake, no-more than ]do to be crolt, - | 
Alb. Do yougotlyenow? | Flo, 


(21) 
Flo, 1 am juſt beginnzng to practice truth; on my Conſcience Lly'd, 
when ſaid I lov'd you, and never knew it, | 

Alb. Well, Flora, if we muſt part in a dream thus, why then farewel 
for ever. | 

Led. Look, look, the wind is down. 

Pro, The tyde is turn'd too; how faſt it ebbs. 

Flo. But hark ye, Alberto, we did but dream, 

Alb. Obſerve Gallants, I have tricks too. 

Flo, We are but both in jeſt. 

Alk. For my part I am in earneſt, 

Flo, Say that word again, and faces about, take heed, my turn is 
KEeXt, | 
Alb. Well; Flora, you know I lpve ye. 

Lod., Obſerve, Sir, ſhe has tricks too, 

Flo, Well, we are friends then, no more dreams nor tricks, This 
ſcurvy buſineſs has almoſt made me forget my Errand; Seignior Lodo- 
vico, to you | come, and hate Women as much as you will; I muſt 
ſpeak with you, 

Lod, If you muſt, there is no xemedy,s pray be ſhort. ; 

Flo. Thus then, did you ne're hearthe ſtory of a Fryer, a Bracelet, 
* and a fair Lady? 

Lod, Can you tell me the interpretation of it ? 

Flo. Suppoſe | ſhou'd ſay Orrante the Lady you ſo nobly reſcued, 
enamoured of your Gallantry, it may be a little too of your perſon, and 
knowing your averſneſs to our Sex, woo'd firit, and ſent it you, wou'd 
you take itill? | +» 

Lod. Pre'thee good ſhe-Serpent don't tempt me, Alberto, thy gueſs 
was right, the Bracelet came from that Lady. 

Flo, Speak ſoftly, good Sir, may theſe be truſted ? 

Lod, I warrant you. ' 

Flo. Why then in plain termes, my Coſfin loves you, and deſires to 
ſceyou, and talk with you; and if you be ſuch a Clown to refuſe her, 
ter me tell you, you are------- | 

Lod, Nay no names good fairy : come, your advice, friends. 

Alb .If you do not love her,'tis pitty but your hide were pull'd over 
your cars, and'tann'd to make riding gloves. 

Pro, Pray be- adviſed, if you purſue this humour of averſneſs to 
Women too far, you will be put into the Chronicle for a wonder a- + 
monglt the = Snows, and blazing Stars, 

Zod. Mult I then forgo my Liberty, and effe& the Title of a good 
womans man: theWoman is handſome.that is the trathon't,& ſhe will 
have me love her, who can help it ; what muſt be, mu{ be ; preſent my 
ſervice to her, and tell her 1 wil! come to her as ſoon as I can,and bring 
ker Bracelet again, with which ſhe baited the Fryer, to fiſh for me. - 

9, 


ny 


- Flo,” And is that all the anſwer I muſt carry her ? TY ' 

Lod, That's more than ever Iſent toa Woman before ; if 'youhaye 
a mind to ſay any thing more, adg it your ſelf, and l'le ſtand'to it, .A- 
dieu Damſel, come, Gentlemen, in troth I am afraid I ſhall be ſpoyld. 

. Flo, Hark, Alberto, let me ſee you about half an hour hence,1 wo#d 
fain ſpeak with you. 

Alb. My pretty Rogue, I'le come to thee, 

Flo. My Colin has given me a fine employment. here,” to Court a 
unhewn fellow ſor her ; my Uncle wou'd be ſtrangely fond on me, if he 
knew what buſineſs I have been about : ſee, here he comes.. '' 

Enter Grimani, a#d Giacomo. CEx. Manct | way 

Gri, It muſt be ſo,there is ſome ſmooth-chin'd Youth ſhe has a ſmar- 

= tering at,ſhe wou'd never have refug'd the proffer elſc: how now, £lpra, 
where's your Coin ? go call her hither, I would ſpeak withiher, 

Flo. 1 ſhall, Sir : O dainty, my Uncle ſpeaks kindly, .. 

[Exit Flora. 

'Gri, There isno other way, I have got a Fryers habit already, I ſhal 
hear her confeſs all. Gracomo, did you never obſerve' my Daughter 
to have a liking to any young Gentlegzan.about Town ? };. 

Gia, Notl, Sir, but I ſuſpect there is ſomething in the wind, for my 
young Miſtreſs and Miſtreſs Flora do ſo whiſper and laugh, and * 
laugh and whiſper, and bluſh, and laugh again, as pales, | 

; k Enter Otrante and Flora, _ 

Gri. "Tis well, they come, I mult ſpeak her very fair; howdo'ſt thou 
Otrante ? my poor Girl, thou look'{t.not well, thou flay'& too much 
within doors ; . why do'ſt not go abroad and take the Ait ſometimes ? 

Orr. Your laſt command, Sir, made a Priſoner of, me, 'which I da ſo 
Religiouſly obſerve, that I havety'd my ſelf to a confinement, becauſe 
I thought you liked it beſt. | | 

Gri, Alaſs, poor Otrante! I was ſomewhathaſty then, thou ſhalt a- 
broad : when go youto your Confeſſion? _: T; 

Otr. Within thishour, now you have gi 

Gri, Preciſely an hour hence ? — #01 12 570.9 5 

Orr, Unleſs you countermand me ('why does heenquire ſ{gtrictly?) 

Gri, Will it be juſt an hour ? p, | 

Flo. What a Devil, he won't conſhrive her himſelf ? Te 

Orr, Yes Sir, and I doubt I ſmell a ploty he does not uſe toiſpeak ſs 
kindly for nothing : if it beſo, T'le fit him to/a hair, . | $1395. 

Grt. An hour hence you ſay ; Hum; + muſt into the Town'about 
tuſineſs : Farewcl,, Otrante, I ſhall meet you beforeyou arcaware. 

4 ' [Ext Gt; and Gia. 

Otr. Flora, Twill be hang'd if my-Father;don'titura Fryer, 

Fo. lain half of.,the.ſame mind, if he. da- : /'-- | 4 ;; 

Otr, '| have a pupdingpat for his mouth, /.. 


$ f 
ven,me leave, 


Fle, 


(23) 
Fle, Andif 1 with Alberto's help don't do him ſome miſchief too, Te" 


give him leave to choak me. Ente# Alberto, 
Otr, Come, let's gp think on't. , 
Flo. le follow ye, 1 will but ſpeak one word to Alberto. 
Flo. Where go you ? CExit Otr. 


Alb. To the Tavern to meet aknot of merry Lads of Greece, to laugh 
and crack a bottle ; we'l drink thy health, 

Flo, Now 1 will try if you love me ; you mult not go this hour yer, 
I have ſome bulineſs for you, * 

Alb, Marry thou try'it me to the quick,there I ſhall be curſt to Hell; 
no matter, Ile tarry, what. mult 7do ? by 

Flo. Firlt, get you ſome diſguiſe, for that is neceſſary to my deſign, 
then come to me, and['le direct you and give you your Cue ; we ſhall 
have ſome ſport. 

Alb. Well, little unlucky Varlet, Miſtreſs Wife that muſt be, I will - 
not fail. Farewel. [Exit Alberto, 

Flo. Doo, the plotislaid, we ſhall have ſport, 

One ſide wilFcurfe, and to'ther thank us for't. Exit, 

BE Actus tertius, 
Enter Grimani and Giacomo with a Fryer's Habit, 
Gri, Ere, Giacomo, take my Cloak, my Hat, my Ruff : ſo, now - 
& help me off with my Doublet, give me the Weed: well, 

how am I diſguis'd ? , 

Gia, Moſt admirable not to be known, 

Gri, Does the Habit fit right ? f 

Gia. So Venerable, it makes me ready to call you Father, but that 
I know ye are my old Maſter ſtill in the inſide, 

Gri "Tis well, 'tis well. - 

Gi. If I ſtay by you but alittle longer, 1 am afraid I ſhould forget 
that too, and fall a conf the ſins of my youth. 

Gri. Thou art a merry fellow. 

Gia. Pray Sir, take heed you meet not ſome of your Brother Fry= 
ers, leſt they ask you ſome ſcurvy quettions in Latin, 1 am in a great 
fright to think how you will do to anſwer them, ; 

Gri, Why? Ican ſpeak ſome Latin, Giacome, 

* Gia. You Latin, ſpeed you, Sir, if you turn Secular upon this,l hope 
I have Latin enough to be your Clerk, ., 
Gri. Giacoms, [le-walk a little, they will be here by and by : but 

be not you ſeen by them, and be ſure be within call with my Cloaths, 

CExit Grimani. 

Gia, What a mad Morris are my old Maſters brains a dancing now; 
let me ſee, he was firſt a Merchant, there he broke, compounded for his 
debts, and with forty Crowns ſet up fſta pawn Broker, thriv'd upon 


that and grew into an Uſurer ; from thence'into a Senator, and now is 
tranſlated. 


(24) 
tranſlated into 9/Fryer; but if he have no more Religion in that than the 
reft of his dev6ut Occupations, Ile be bound do dine upon his Beads; 
ifhe ould trappan my young Miſtreſs now, it would grieve me to the 
heart, he has enjoyned me filence upon my life, and [ have abouttwen- - 
ty times ſworn to him, that I am dumb, yet for all that, if 7 meet the 
young Gentlewoman, Ile give her a hint : ſ'foot here's Miltreſs Flora, 
{ mult hid theſe things. 
| Enter Flora. * 
For if ſhe diſcover it, ſhe'l make him horn mad. 
Flo. Hold, Gracamo, why ſo. haſty ? what ha'you got there, a piece 
of Midwifery * Y 
: Gia. Pray forſooth keep on your way, 7am in haſt. 
. Flo, Te only know what yon have got there, am afraid 'tis a little 
piece of Infantry. 
Gia, What if it is? nay,pray be quiet, 7 am not at leiſure to give you 
an anſwer now. X 
Flo, Nay, but 7 am refolv'd,. 7-will ſee now, for my minds ſake, 
Gia. Why row you have ſcen, what are you the bctter ? 'Tis only 
ſome of my Malters things, ./ am going to the Taylors to men- 


rg. 
* ' Why, do my Uacle's Taylors make Ruffs and Hats ? 
Gia. Nay pray Miſtreſs, indeed / amin haſt, . 7 fear ſhe has found it, 
[Exit Giac. 

Flo. Why, this was to my wiſh, 7 ſee our ſuſpition was not ill 
grounded, 7 did intend lberro ſhould play them ſome-prank, and 7 
knew not what, till. good fortune. now informed me, Saint Albert, 

Enter Alberto, | 

Al», Well Miſtreſs mine,you ſee / am Metamorphos'd,what's to be 
done now? 1wou'd fajn be at liberty, 

Flo, Only thus, ſtay here about but two minuits, and you will leight 
upon Giacomo with a parcel of things under his arm,thoſe you muſt take 
from him, carry him aſide, bind him and gag him. 

Alb. But why mult poor Giacomo be'us'd thus hardly ? 

Flo, There's reaſon for't, you ſhall not know ; all things are ripe, it 
will produce a full-mouth'd laughter, he ſure you do't or all will be 
ſpoyl'd. | ; [Exit Florg. -. 

Ab. Well, little piece of miſchief, you Thall. be ſatisfied : what 
more teſtimonies of. love wou'd this Wench have, then for me to leave 
my Company, and my Drink, and turn down-right Rogue for her ſake, 
unleſs ſhe.would have my heart's blood out. 

Enter Giacomg haſtily. 

Ohere comes the Youth 7 muſt praftice upon, Stand. 

Gta. Tis but one bogics werk, you may do it your ſelf ; .my by. 
ſineſs is going, * Flora prepone. 


| | 1 (25) 
Alb. Seand,; 116 cuh you we theqat, come, deliyer me thaſe things. 
Gia. (rh 4 Wat erg GN , Lipiths: Hhe. 199 xl 00k 


fox a fool ſure; pre'thee friend be quiet, Lam not at leiſure to jeſt now, 
ſome other time. A. 7 "ESL 40 | 
, Mlb, Death, you Dog, Whelp, do you: laugh, this. is not jeling, 


G14, Murder, murder. | aa de Aon 
Alb. Sirrah, another word; and Ile-cut your Tongue, out. MOONS 
Gia: Ggod Sir, take my goods, and ſpare ny life.”  .. © . © 

Ath. O, Sir, are you out of your jefting hymour : 'tiay, ſtay, you 
mult along with me, 1have ſome- employment for you4go, as welbas 
for.your ware;. Mhom Bagh. ED: ht Þ 
31-61 -Good Sir, pray $ir,. my Maſter has ſefit me in haſt.” 

"Alb. Come, alon » hang your Maſter, © TY i. 705e68 

- Gia, With all my heart, but pray have me excus'd at thistime, ano- 
thercime [le wait on you. _- | AE 

Alb, Along, along, Ile prick you forwards, if you hatig.an arſe, 
Gia, O.gogd ſweet Sir, what will become.of. me? ,, [Exit ambs, 
vol Vit} auld 34052 Enter Qtraite and Flora. | pg fav 

Elo,. He hay: met with him, the Games begun, if you ſhou'd ptove 
. Otr, 1 warrant ghee, Wench. _ X Rs 
' Enter Grimani i the Fryer's Habit, EPReNes 

&, he comes,. 'tis he, my gueſs was right, it is my Father, 

Flo, Stay, let me Tee, 'tis he, .I know him by his will eyes. © + _ 

Grz, 'Tis certain, ſhe may ſerye metricks, Fathers we [,oxdcof 
mannors, but others come ſometimes and huats the Game up, 1 fhall 
know by and by; they are here,-now to the work, © , 

Ctr, He movestowards us; Nt 
Pi. Heayne bleſſing guard my Daughter, do. you want ought in 
Rf foo not Ur wow whirl Mad: Lag 

Orr. Take your Cu, Colin : Holy Father,'T cothe ro pay attgof 
a Devotion Heaven challenges from all, can'you dite& nitwhere'Fs- 
ther Dominicois, 'tishe I look for? ON 

Gri. 'Tis not two hours yet, ſinge a ſudden ſickneſs fo ronghly ſeized 
upon that.old man, that he was forced totake him to his bed, hecall'd 
me to-hizngand.put me in-truſt to exccute- his office (this place, I 
think-yous buſineſs is to me then, GY 

Fle. 1 iwiſh-a lye .wou'd, choak thee,” thou halt *t6ld' a loud one; 
wou'd do. thy bufineſs ? | 

Otr, Alaſs, I grieve for him, then holy Sir, fince he has truſted tos 
youl will preſume. that I may do ſo-too,. and tell thoſe griefs which I 
intended none but he ſhou'd know, for tg [ay truth, [care at this time 
hither not to confefs my fins, byt-tell 'niy -woes, which gone, I muft 
exaploy your pious Counſel. * © © x: DP 4 gh. 


(26) 
Grs. Speak theh,” Orr: Thenknow; Father, Hy 
Flo. <rrths fellow: Gri. "How's 3-2 th -<W5 þ 
Orr, I canhot 'fay 1 with 1 had tiene, 'but yer tie is Toth'a one; A 


Child leſs dutiful would put it in his prayers, 

Flo. Marry would ſhe, were te my Father, 1 would try all the 
Saints in the Kalender to-have him ſent to his long home: j js c en'too 
dutiful a. Child to him. : 


Gri. The Devil, ſhall I endure this 7 
Flo, He's old aid pecvith, &bverovs and jealous fad theſe 1 atten- 


ded with their ſeveral maladies. 
"Gri, Pray young Gentlewothan let her ſpeak her felf.. 
Flo. 1 muſt do it for her, ſheis ſuch a modeſt 47 fo' oyer-prown 
with duty'and obedietice, ſhe will not relthalf, It were Pitty ro 


leave out any. 
Orr. Tis trite,” nor ſhould 1 how atlen « offload my burden'd foul, 
but that this Rigorous cruelty has frighte me both from my peace and 


innocence. 
Flo. He's all-difeaſes both in mind and body, ! Which makes him full 


thy humours, he's as riafty* tbo as his' 6wn Cloſer, his filthy Jay! 
pet tng for none gets otit again, there's hop a'Nling! mflata 


eſcape, and he himſelf a Jaylor, not a Father. 
Gris, Iſhall burſt with ſpleen, but I rmwft contain my ſelf, well, all 


this is be X the lx's ___ Iiiky 
Flo. Y. way 't tothe pur ren. yet for yo Locks and 


Ys 254 a is'dbors ts 
on ente,, all this heedstiot, £071 
is Y e pe Be inch "$f forif* you ſhou'dMmot aedeeiaatiar 
EN how cou' 'd'you proportion Phyſick for ter Cure: ? [ muſtgo 


on Pie 
Re down-right Devil is ner, Ati etilrecal . 
mn % Slpolipon, ther, F. toe trot ſoon cohclade that 


ceaſiires 
hs: wa ro e Ant Te Rh if vers ſaſpitious of all 


MM ſriends.and ind'red,.. | 

%. Ana bil elf, ſome fay, kids a'Oolts t668th; © © -- 

Otr,, He ſcarce allpws.me Gowns ind" 'Petticoats, {6 niggardly,l dare 
not ask fiim for the Neceſſities of his Family, he he Miuts meupas if 1 
un, denies me guine freedorris due to Wornen, makes 'me 
y me wholly in M7 broths and Gellies, 


e not my Father, I ſhou'd fay more, but 


were 2 N 
his drulge, and does i implo 


ſpreadingplaiſters. Were 
Te filence here, 
Gr, 1-ſhall F en-run-mad, dee think-it: becomes you'to ſpeak. theſe 


vahand ſome things of your Father? ? 
Orr. NNE Ks Sings beſceming him, I'were to blame ; but —_ 


(29) 
am content to ſuffer, and.a5k nomoge redreſs than to unfold my for- 
rows, and;that:to-ſuch $00 Ga : | 

Flo, Who, we may be confident will keep them ſecret. 

Otr, 'Tis-Charity to hear me. | | 

Elo, You preach Charity, and you muſt hear her. 

Gri, 1 mult be bound to hear my ſelf abus'd, O 1 cou'd, that ever 
mortal man ſhou'd be thus abus'd,. and by __ Child, it makes me 
fick, ſick at-heart, O, halt dye. 

Flo; Alas, the- Father ano well o thay he w6u 4 dye with ſpight. 

Otr., Are-youngot well Sir.? what ails you; ? Poor man; he fooks mon- 
- trousill, look how he ſtares and g 

Flo. Are you not troubled witht Bing. ſickneſs,- Sir ?- 

Gr. 1am troubled with two furies that are worſe than the! diſeaſes 
of an Hoſpital, but I ſhall plague you for this, young 'Devilings, 1 
(hall. .-;; 

Or. Bleſs me, the man raves, Ofor an exorciſm. | 

Gri. I'le make you ſmoak for this dayes work, 1 will, look to it, I'te 
make yowboth examples. 

Flo, Bleſs me, Colin, he is ſtark mad, perfectly ditracted, let's be 
gobg3 let he miſchieh ys. 

Gr, Good fir, be patient, wel ſend ſome body to you. 

Gri, Devils, Witches, He: bury you alive. | 

Flo. au away, his fit graws ſtrong upon him, we muſt run 
" for't, ha, ha, CExit Otr, and Flo, 
Gri. The great: TENG _ you;Fle follow you with a Vengeance, 


Giacomo, Gracomo, come. bring my Cloaths, wby. Giacamo, you dog, 
where are you?-got. anſwer, the V in's gone a hearing, Hell and 
Damnation,all things conſpire me, to torment me, I all be dif- 


covar'd in this habit hy ſome of the Covent, and that will be worſe than 
all. Giacome, Giacomo, he's gone; undone, undone, S ever 


ruin'd, 
Enter Flora. 

Flac. Alas; good Sit, is-not the fit .off yet, Sir? come, ku me hold 
your head, indeed I pitty ye. 

Grz. Thouvile, wicked, baftly Woman, wittthou break my heart ? 
Tle plague thee. 

Flo, Fye, Sir, a man of your Coat fo paſſionate, and give ſuch bitter 
language. 

Gs. hou Devilin Womans ſhape, thou knew'ft me well enough, 
thou damn'd thing, thou, 

Fla. Who I? I know you: for no other than the Fryer whom Domi= 
aicobeing lick fent to.confeſs my. Colin. , _ 

Gri. Yes,Kate,you do; you do know me for your Uncle, forall your 


Sm whom you and your crackt Colin have .#s'd {© finely be- 
E 2 twirt 


(23) 
twixt you, but I fhall;maul.you for't, Gypſies, I'ſhall, * 
Flo, Fye, fye, Sir, you my Uncle 2. Alaſs, you are a- rl man, -and: 
may Convert him, preach to him; Sir. 
Gri, Upon what Text, Miſtreſs Machiavel ? 


Flo, Dives and Lazarus were. an.cxecllent- Ir for your diſ- 
courſe, 


Gri, You will not know me then ? - 


Flo, Alas, good Fryer, you are charitable in helagcen tent to take his 
Rame vpon you, but you will undo him, Sir, with geftleneſs; uſe him 


ſharply, he's the better, appoint him. for .his pennance-once a day-to. 
throw away a boy or two. 


Gri, Why aot his untucky Neece? - 

Flo. O Sir, ſhe will-light upon her feet like a Cat.- 

Gri. And ſhe will ſcratch too.. 

Fls, Only her Cat-fac'd Uncles, his Daughter toois Cattie. 

Gri. 1 do believe ſhe has that vertye at her fingers ends, that ſame 
Uncle of Jorrs. will put you in a ſack together. 

Flo. Then ſhuffle, Sir. 

Gre. Into-th&Sea, You will not know me, then? 

Flo. Troth now I think on't, I have a way to know whoyouare, Tle 
$0 ſee if there be any Fryer in the Covent, and bring him to _— 
with you, that way I may find which.is my good Uncle. 

Gri, What will you do, Huſwife? 

Flo. Fetch a touch-ſtone, a Fryer to try an Uncle. 
- Gri, Why, thou wilt not undo me after all;will ye ? 

Flo, O, by no means, Uncle, nay; Fe: keep your counſel ſo far too, 
that. I'will-have but one ballad made'on you, Ile go call him. - | 
-::,G7;;' Nay, tay Flora, good. Flora, Ile forgive thee. wy 

Flo. lam lcalto all entreaties, 1 will not loſe this Sport of this piece 
of iſchief to be the Queen of Fairies ? I'le go fetch one inſtantly. 

[Exit Flora, 

Gri, O, this Wench will undo me, ruin'd fer ever, butIam e 'en 
JuſHy.ſerwd, forthave us'd them too barbaroully. O, this Rogue to 
be gone now with my Cloaths, there is no avoiding the Prior, I muſt 
- expeCt-to have my —_ drayn'd weetly.- Giacomo, Giacomo, he hears 
not, he ſhall ſmart for this, and that ſoundly too. 

- Giacomo rowls in bound. + 
Giz, Aw, aw, aw, O. 


. Gri, How now, what Giacomo, bound and rifled ? ſpeak Rogue: 
Gia. Aw, aw, O, aw, O. 


 Gri, Gagg'd too, and rifled too, in my Conſcience I mult ſet him at 


berty,ſo now, how came you in this pickle? where are my Cloaths, 
. FORE $I 


| Gia... Oh Maſter. G13. Speak, Sirrah, where are my Cloaths ? 


G38, 


. 


1» 


' (29) 

Gia © Maſter, never was any man fo ferv'd, fo lamntably abus 
as 7 hive been. 

Gri, Yes, Rogue, 1 know one hasdSeen worfe, ; 

Gia. Goingalong with your Cloaths, there meets me a boyſterous 
ſellow with a two handed-ſword,he drew upon me,and alas, you know, 
what cou'd a poor naked man do? took all your Cloaths from me, ba- 
ſted me ill-favouredly, and at laſt boun'd and gagg'd me, I heard 
when you firſt call d me, but an 7 ſhou'd ha'been hang'd, 7 cou'd not 
royl any ſooner to you, than 7 did. TY : 

Gri, The Devil and il] luck conſpire together to ſpjte me. 7 know 
not what to do, there's no Raying here, and in this Habit z home 7 dare 
not go through the fireets ; here, Sirrah, help me off with this curfed=- 
weed, give me your Doublet, Coat, and Cap: 

Gia. And what ſhall /do, Maſter ? 

Gri. Go hang your ſelf, Rogue : come, ſtrip, '{trip. 

j Gia. There they are, Sir, muſt 7 put on the Fryer's Habit ? 
Gr. If you have a mind to be flead,go carry them home where you - 
borrowed them : but ſtay firſt, han't you the key of the houſe ? 
* Gia, Not ISir, Miſtreſs Flora has it. ' 

Gri, The Devil ſhe has, nay then 7 am quite ruin'd to all intents and: 
purpoſes, what a bed-role of miſchiefs have lit upon me one after ano- | 
ther ? 1 muſt run ſome whither and hide my ſelf, but where know 
not, Go, Giacomo, about your Errand, when you have delivered it, 
return,:.and find me if you can, for le try to lofe my ſelf.” 

LExit ſeverally, 


Scena tertia 
Enter Otrante, Dominico, and Flora, - 

Ory, 'Tis'as 1 tell you, Sir. 

Dem. Imuſt confeſs 'tis probable enough; for when /told him of 
it, and return'd the Bracelet, he vow'd he knew not that, nor yoh. 

Orr, Icanno longer hide my.juſt reſentments, ſee here this Letter: 
he within theſe two hours ſent me by an old piece of Iniquity; hid in 
a Muffler, pray ſet me beg the kindneſs of you, Father, to find him 
out, and give 1t him back with your own hand : that he may ſee that 
Iſo much ſcorn him ; you may read it at your feiſure. 

Dom, Daughter, 7 will, and make him an example to fright all evill 
minded -menlike him, from daring to attempt ſuch noble Chaſtity. 

Otr, Tleaveit now to your diſcretion ; Father, for / have born but 
x00 much already to wiſh him longer ſafety. 

Dom. Ile do it, and to the purpoſe, 1'le ſeek him out inftantly, fare- 
wel, Daughter. . [Exit Fryer. 

Flo. Here's a piece of Church-work now, This Love has made her 
a brave Engeneer, . 

Orr. Well, Flora, but am not 7a wicked Wench, to uſe this good 
old man thus? - Flo, 


| (30) 
Flo, Troth 7 believe you. will-never be Sainted for it, 
Orr. Heaven pardon me, had / another way to hope the »yment 
of my longing wiſhes, 7wou'dmor uſe this, but love which v.aws me 
to if, 
Flo. And that draws, as ſtrong Yoke of Oxen- 
Otr. Makes all conſideration ſtoop to my paſſion ; but Flora, did he 
'fay he wou'd come? | 
Flo. Yes, but neither /nor he know when,'tis the untoward'ſt piece 
that ever tumbled out of a Woman, | 
Orr. ThisLetter, / hope, will bring him to me, Ile up tomy Cham- 
ber and wiſh, pre*thee do thou fit croſs-leg'd for me, it may, bring 
900d luck. [Exizt Otr, 
Flo, Iſee ſhe will have him, let him do his worſt. 7do but think 
what a peck of troubles my worſhipful Ecclefiaſtical Uncle is in by this 
time, 7 know not how 7 ſhall come off with him, the beſt on't is, / 
have the key of the Houſe in my poſſeſſion, and he muſt come to Com- 
poſition, before he can get to any more Cloaths, Ha, -who have we 
here ? | OY 
Enter Lodovico, | 
' Ledovico \to0 alone, mufing in a dump, 7 wonder what wind blows 
him. hither. ; ROSES 
Led. What the Devil ſhou'd come into this Womang head to make 
her havea mind to me ? ſhe needs muſt know 7don't care for her, nor 
any of her kind,'tis a witty and aprety Wench, and if ſhe will give her 
Maiden - head, and force it upon me, 7 cannot help it, 'tis no fault of 
mine,ha,look if 7 ha' not loſt my. way with thinking on her,& the Devil 
has ſet me juſt over againſt the houſe, & there is her ſcout Miſtreſs too, 
Flo. Speed ye, Sir, are you ſaying your prayers before. hand to 
ſerve you today and to morrow ? : 
Led, No, Madam muſtard, 7am only praying to be deliver'd from 
ye, can you tell how 7came hither ? | 
Flo, Sir, Thavedelivered your Meſſage to my Colin. 
Led, Or can you direQt me how to get back again? 
Flo, And ſhe expects the performance of your promile. 
Led, For Tam in ſuch a Quandarie, 7 ſhall never find. the way my 
ſelf. | | 
Flo, If you will tep in now, you may ſee her, there js:4n excellent 
opportunity. | 
Led, Or get me a Porter to-ſhew me to my Lodging. 
Fl», You don't mind me. 
Lod. Not 1, by my troth, what was't you ſaid ? 
Flo. Why, my Caſin, Sir. "op MY 
Led. O your Coſin, forſooth, commend me to her, and tell her, 7 
will ſend her.a powder for the Green-fickneſs, 1 EW 


| (3r)- 
Flo, Tſuppoſe you nre turn'd Mounte-bank, Sir, 7 fhall need fone 
my felf too, farewel. . . CEx Flora, 
Lod, And you may tell that----<--What, gone? well, "tise'en a 
fair riddance, / have ſcapt a railing, for 7ſhou'd have vext her, that's 
certain. Curſe on theſe Women, 7am ſtrangely tempted, yet won't 


be in Love. - 
Enttr Ptroſpero. 

Pro, Lodovico, well met, what, faith got ſ> near your Miſtreſs 
Lodging, now / ſee you will be converted. 

Lod. No, you are miftaken, Proſpero, 7 was thinking feriouſly on 
ſome thing or other, and loſt my way. 

Pro.. On purp6ſe came 7 toſee how itis like to go with you, but 
whether do you think 7 am going ? 

Led. Why, toa Wench it may be. 

Pyo. No, by my troth, 7am not ſo lewdly given, but Jam ſorry 
you put me in mind on't. x 

Lod, Whither is't then'? 

Pro, Why, cen to borrow a wheel-barrow, an'arm full of freth - 
raw, and a ſtrong Porter. 

Lod. Hey day, what to do ? - 

Pro, To plant them at the Tavern-door, to bring home Seignior 
Alberto's Worſhip in, m ſure he'l thank me for't to morrow. 

Lod, Poor Gentleman, then we ſhall have him to morrow -undo + 
himſelf in ſmall-beer and civil Oranges. | 

Enter Flora riitring, Grimani following her with a ſtick, 

Flo, Help, help, good Gentlemen fave'me. 

Pro, How, now, what is the matter ? 

Grz, You filthy Carrion, Ile break your bones. 

: 14: Ha" you, niet with your match, little fpit-fire, who has abug'd 
you ABT! oe WAUL7 IS 5 | 

' * Flo, O'Gentlemeh, thatugly maungy, ill-look foot boy has hunted ' 
me like a Hare. ; 

Gri, Ile tear'thee limb-by limb, not leave a picce of thee ſo big as 
a wal-nut, 

Pro. . Saucy Raſcal, keep off. - 

.. . Gri. You, what are you that ſtops'me ? hinder me not, but let me 
chaſtiſe that damnable Wotnan. 

Flo, O-good Gentlemen, let him not come near me. 

Led, at feNow is this ? whoſe man is he ? 

Flo, Alas, Tknow not, but he fell upon me in the ftreet, with ill 
language, which he wou'd have followed with blows, -but that the 
nimbleneſs of my heels helpt me to this timely reſcue. 

Gri. You there that guard her, look to your ſelves, and let her go, . 
' you had beſt, that curſed thing has ingroſs'd all miſchicf to her ſelf, it 


CVeET.. 


(32) * 
ever there was a Whoreof Baby/on, in Chriſtendom; this was her tire 
woman, and Tutor, and taught her above half her good Qualities, ſhe 
15 the verieſt arrant incarnate Deyil, 
Lod, Impudent Rogue, . do youlong for kicking ? 
. Flo. That he does without doubt, Gentlemen, pray let him not 
want it, O good Sir, ſave me. | 
Gri, Raſcals; if you preſerve her longer from my vengeance, I'le 
have you both hang'd, and ſhe betwixt you. 
Pro, Nay then, Sirrah, you muſt have it. | 
.Gri. What do you mean, you ſlaves, you know me well enqugh, 
- and ſo does that Monſter too, for all her diſſembling. 
.. Lod, We know you, Sirrah, -why, what are you ? 
' Flo, O Gentlemen, hold your anger, /know him now, alaſs, it is 
my Uncle, 3's 
. Gri, Am I ſo, Gibcat ? 
Pro, Your Uncle, what Grimar:, the rich old Senator ? 
Flo. The very ſame, but I admire he-ſhould abuſe his dignity ſo 
much to appear in this habit, 7 | 
Gri. Do you ſo, witch, now / hope 7 may have liberty to uſe her as 
ſhe deſerves. 

. Led, -Nay, fye Sir, does this ſuit with your quality ? 7 thought you 

had been old enough to have left theſe boys tricks at theſe years, ha, 
\ ha, ha, | 
Gr:. *Tis very well. | 
Pro, A Senatorand goO a &raruony, ha, ha, ha. 
Gri. Very fine, bettcr and better, laugh on, but 7 ſhall make ye all 
ſmart for't, that 7 ſhall. | 
Pro, and Lod. Ha, ha, ha. 

-£lo. Well, Gentlemen, now let him looſe to me, Uncle, pray let 
you and [come to a parley alittle, you knew what 7know of well e- 
nough, though 7 have not yet diſcoyered your taking a Fryer's habit, 
and abuſing the Church, yet 7 can do it, and if you be not, patient and 
come to Compoſition with me quickly, 7 vvill do it. P 

Gri. Do'ſt thou not conſider, Baggage, hovy thou haſt abus'd me 
alrcady, and doſt thou perliſt ? Sto FRY 

Flo. All's one for that, 4 vvill do it vyorſe, I vvyillfetthe Inquiſition 
on your back, if you do not come to termes, beſides you knoyv1am 
commarider of the Caſtle, nota rag of Cloaths you get at,*'you ſhall 
foot it inthis fine garb, and vve ſhall ſee you vvithin this hour, at the 
head of a Regiment of Boys;and then theſe tyyo Gentlemen and I vvill * 
laugh at you out of your ovvn vvindovvs.” Tt 

Gri. You vvill, you ſay, this is brave. . * ©... | 
- L d, This Wench has.Roguery cnough to vex the vyhole Senate, 
vve'l Seignior Gri#en:, you ec hovv the cafeſtatds,if you wp. rob 

oi 


Xx . (33 ) 
Triends advice, compound with her, you ſec ſhe's refoly'd. 
*-'-Gri, "Why; «will youdo all: theſe things; Neece ? | 
 -Fto. ;As ſure as you-did pofthert nay,''be' quick; I will offer you 
no more, my Colin, and I can eaſily make'our own-ſifeties. ; 
Gri. What will you do, fly-to a Cloyſter?'f will fetch you out with 
amurrain to ye, ©, B14 4 20 
_ Fle, No, no; Sir;-we'lmake furer work than anything of Religion 
can affottl us, we will'e'ew marry ſome body dr other ;0theſe two'Gen- 
tlemen ox thenext we meet; there are younger Brothers erioogh about 
the Fown/will be glad of 'us.. © © 1065 27 2 20 
Pro, . You muſteloſe with her, you ſee there's no remedy, 

-Gri, Well; Flora, thou haſt almoſt broke my heart, thou haſt got 
the better. onime, but becauſe I can do.no gtherwiſe, I will forgive | 
upon con4ition.thou-play*ft me no more of theſe tricks: come, give me 
the key. 

| Ele, Mey;foft: Uncle,two words to a bargain, [mult have canditions, 
and your Credit mgaged for the performance, before theſe two Gentle- 
men. ©: | TT 6 

Lod, Rare wench, I cou'd almoſt find in my.hearttovhate'Women - 
borkoager, © ini i nt 1 | F-,199 

Gri, Will you never leave? well; fpcak-your Conditions, if it be'a 
Gown or a Petticoat;E&-to make no more-words,thou fhalt have them. 

Flo. No,Uncle,'tis Liberty,free liberty for us to go abroad when we 
pleaſe,to laugh,talk, dance, ſing, and take the Air, as other young La- 
dies do,: when, and-with whom we ſhall think fit, to have what Gowns 
and Dreflings wehave'a mind to, and not to haveiour Actions pry'd in- 
to: by your buſtezealoufic; ff | | 

Pro. Theſe Conditionsare but fair, :you muſt grant- them. 

Flo. If you will do't, ſay the word; -if not, you apprehend what will 
follow, -you know Liove miſchief. | 

-Gri. I,too wlll] ſee I muſt zrentthem;for there isno help for't;well, 
Gentlewoman, you thall haverthis Libetty, will that content you ?. . 
Flo,''Swear then upon your honourito perform the bargain before 
theſe Witneſſes. : n: 11-. -- Vein event. 3099 pongery 12 t: 2 
'G77. . But then you ſhall engage to play me no more tricks. 
F/o.: That's:as youdeſerye, Unclez'till yourforce me to it, I promiſe 
you 1 won't ;. wilt you ſwear? . 22137 . 

Grs. Ido ſwear, but how ſhall Henow.:you will preſerve your ho- 

nours ? ,uvoy iu biow's co, a ; 
Flo. Let us alone; tboy'L be ſafeſt im-ouir.bwn keeping; dear witneſs, 
Genflemen:© 2:5 oy 22197 N07 non 5,7 oy; | 

Lod. We do, andwec ſhillexpet yon keep your werd. 

Grs. Youarc a couple of ſweet Youths to aſſiſt arebellious Woman 
in her difobedhence,) | o{avinun 7x9 2d UE itt 19 0m 
L4a, We do nothing but what begomegus: 107 11tt 2 Fo Emer * 


. 
** 


- (38Y 
- Enter Giacomo in a Blanket, ; 

Gia, 'Tis very cold weather, by'r Lady, were it not {or this wel 
Cloak I ſhou'd be ſtarv'd, if 1 could find my Maſter new, "tis ten to one . 
but we ſhou'd change habits agen... | 

Pro, What have we hete, op}, 4 | 

Gia. O Maſter, have I found you? Fle be ſworn I have worn out my 
ſhooes in ſeeking you,. I have been at all the Tap-houſes.in Town, at 
the Cuſtard-Womans,. and.her that your Worſhip bought Puddi 
pies of,” for your old Stockings. _ I have. been at the Cunning-mans 
ſee if he cou'd help me to you, and becauſe I heard you ſay you wou'd 
hide your ſelf;I have been in the Subburbs to try if you were not earth'd 
in ſome. of. thoſe warrens there, but you were.no-where to be found. 

Grz. 1. Giacoma, here | am, thy old Maſter ſtill; all that's left of 
me, but I have been us'd like a Jew ; have you carried the Fryer his Ha- 
bit home ? - he 

Gra. Yes, Sir, and he lent.me here you fee three quarters of 
his bed-cloaths to cover my nakedneſs, yold Kim what a lamentable 

ickle you were in, he preſents his ſervice to ye, and bid me tell you 
he is very ſorry for your heavineſs. 

Gr:i. You Dog, Whelp, have you told him ? -I ſhall be diſcovered 
by the Rognes babling, and utterly undone. | 

Gs. Pray Sir, be not angry, I did it for the belt. 

_ Led, Ha, ha, ha,nay, good Sir, no more fury. 

Flo. Pray Uncle be patient, we will do. wellenough, I warrant you 
the Fryer wilt be cafily charm'd to filence : come, if you will go in, may 
be I may caſt a figure for your Cloaths Giacomo was rob'd Ly 

Gri, Well, 6 tans = go rs » hay ——_ kberty to fret 
alone, anger an my heart ſtrings c ience. 

Flo, es a medicine for a mad-Dag. NOR 

.  LEx«tGri. Flo. and Gia. 

Led. 'Tis a brave ſtory, wou'd we knewit all, 1 will ſee this Lady, 
and it be but to inform my ſelf in all the of it. 

Pro, I fee ancaſie matter wilkcarry you to her;.fare you well, Sir,. 
I muſt about my.employment, Alberto may be left in the ſuds, 

9 0! CExir Prof. 

Lad. Speed ye, I willgo ſec her, I will-not, pox of it, I muſt' go 
drink away this fit, no other way to cureit,- but drowning. 

Dom, Stay, Lodovico, a word with you.. 

Led, The Fryer again, blefs me,” whats a' foot now? -- .. 

Dom. I an glad I havelit upon you, there's your -Letter that you 
fent, both that and your's, and now expethe ſevereſtcenfute of the 
Church , I ſhall make you an example. :. - [Exit Fryer 

Led. Another trick. I ſhall be excommunicated. for-not- loving this 
Woman, let's ſec the ſuperferiprion;s 7 , eſt 


(35) * 
Theſe to the fair Otrante, 
* Very good and I writ this I warrant ; ſfaat, "tis ſ@ | figce [ 
wrote any thing, 1 believe I have forgot : well, th proceed to the 


1nfide. 
c 

Y Ned by my hopes, that you cannot hate one that {o mygh love; yon, 
I nor can I believe it, till you pleaſe co tell me ſo your ſelf ; rhbes afternoon 
I hear your Father js ta go frih. 1 will walk before your door, nad wien you 
. ſee the moſs convenient timee, be pleas'd to hany 4 ſcarf tut of your window, 
and at that ſign Ile come and knock, gently at your Gate, where If you pleaſe 
to appoint one that you dare truſt to let me in, you vill adenie the moſt paſ- 
ſronate of all Lovers. Lodovico. 


Faireſt Otrante, 


She has promis'd for me more in my name, then I ſhall e're make good. 
Um, the moſt paſſionate of alt Lovers, * Lodovice. 
The World, the Fleſh, and the Devil, met in Women. Honeſt ſhe 
cannot be, that's impoſſible, ſhe knows | canngx love her well enough 
to marry her 5 befides'no honeſt Woman woyld e're have made her 
Confeſſor her Pander, 7 ſee ſhe has a mind 7 ſhould begin, (to /illanore, 
for him, her Colin told me, her Father went to match her to) be it ſo, 
1 muſt c'en do't perforce againſt my will. 
'Women ace Natures wonders, madefot men, 

Firſt to be born of, then deſtroy'd agen, 

Attus L a prima, 


Enter Franciſco. 
Fra, Sr him be Noble, 7 will be reveng'd, Honour ewuſt-veil when 
Injury commands to ſtrike, and / will do it home, 'tis life 
mult pay the Ranſom of my loſs, twice he has given me mine; debts 
which cannot be repay'd, unleſs the Creditors blood do cancel the Ob- 
ligation, "tis too a ſhameto Jet him live, and be kis debtor Rill : 


ſe Rogues ( h Cowards) 1 muſt again » they are Vil- 
lains to my wiſh, ans thou'd I fee for other ſeco bon Ik deligns, 
who knows but they may be honeſt like Lodovico,and then /am ſpoyl'd. 
No, it muſt be they, or none. 

| Enter Alberto drunk, led in by a T avern-boy, 
Alb, Boy. Boy. Here, Sir. Ai. Why Boy, Lay. 
Boy. Here, Sir, what wou'd you have'? 
Alb, Lead me tothat Wench, Boy. 
Soy, Wench, Sir, where is there'any Wench? 

Alb. Why, doſt thou not fee her there, ſtanding with ber Arms « 
Kemb : alittle nearer, Rogue," O ſweet Wench, come and huſs me. 

Fre, What, Alberto, anddrunk ? 'tiswelt-you arc ſo: had you been 


*fober, 7 ſhould have reckon'd a little with you. 
F 2 AN. 


- (36) 
2 Come huſwife, ſhall thou and.1 have #delicate tumble on as 
Be 


Fra. This drunſen puppy takes,me fora. watt. cpatcer, farewel, till 
you are ſober, . * LExit Ftan.; 


Alb, Stay, what thou gone ſweet-heart ? come, Boy, throw me 
down upon the Bed alone then. 
What Bed, Sir ? here's no Bed. . HR & 6 
9g why, that Bed there; art thou blind, Boy? Fed Ln 
boy. 1 ſee no Bed,” will-you walk to your Lodging 2. 
Alb. Do'ſt think. am drunk, and talk idlely,. Boy ? Sirrah, I fay 
_ me down there vickly, or.I will kick thee. - 
Boy. F6r Heavens ſake be quiet; Sir, you will be ſeen elſe... 
Alb. Saucy Rogue, bida Gentleman be quiet, take that... /- -.. + 
© Boy. Se, now you have laid your ſelf down, for ſhame get up, Sir, 
Alb. What, cannot a man ſleep at, quiet in his Bed for- you, :you- 
bawling Baſtard; ſet me ſome ſmall beer, get- me another: Dlenkes, 
and pat out the Candle. Jr 
Boy. Are you mad, why, you are in the ſtregt, Sir ?::. 
Alb. Then remove me into the Kennel, thazno m—_ rread on me... 
Boy. 1f you won't tiſe, 1'le Teave you, Sir-, TI 


Alb, Be gone, and be harg” d, FOB; but dilturb es ID * 
Boy+ Fare you well; 'Sir. 


Alb, Sirrah, ſhut the door after you, and throw in tn Rey, 1 ſhall 
catch cold if I riſein my Shirt, 


Boy. Good night, Sir, you have but a bard Lodging on't, 1 doubt 
Sir, ha, ha, ha. 


Enter Pietro and Peſyiro, oy faetlang At Alb. 


a# # ww +* 


that's oi of cud detand aka yang Ny 
ic 


PYf.”Pick his pockets, fa let him {link till his heart akes, 20 6 wu 
tothet hide. 


Pie, $'foot, here's nothing bot braſs money. and falſe Dice; and here 
nothing but an Antidote,againft the Pox. ... .- 1 

Pe/. Let's ſee if that may-be,worth ſomewhat 3 a Syrings, isthat all ? 
{ doubt ſome body has been nibling; here, beforeus z his Clotk, Hat, 
and Sword, are warth a little, that's the. belt on't. 

Pie., By your leave, Sir, Jul make. bold to, put you-in querpo, 
this hat is ſomething heavy, ;tis not for your wearing, your Sword too, 


now yot are drunk, you might da milcual;aith itz a Swordin a mad 
mans hard is dangetovs.,. ©: -.,.... 


hs Pef. 


—_ 
Pef: Tryto flip off his' Doublet without waking of him, 
P;e. Pox on't, 'tis riveted on I think, © Alb. Aw, aw. 


Pie, He wakes, away, away, we're pretty well paid for our pains: 
Pef, Whither ſhall's carry them ? 

Pie. Why, to my old Land-lady's, whither ſhou'd we carry them ? 
She and her ſmug Daughter, willmake us welcome. 

Peſ. Well, come then, 

Pie. Why do'tt not go, you don't ſtrain-Complements at the door, 
I hope. - 

Fe O, your Servant, Sir, I beſeech you, Ex ama, 

Enter Proſpero. 

Pro, 'Tis ſtrange I cannot find him, drunk he is, that's not+to be 

queſtioned, but whither he's.ſtaggend, 'tis paſt my skill to learn : what 
' have we here, an Emblem of mortality, a man kill'd ? here has been 
foul play. O Diabolo, 'tis Alberto, nay, there is hopes he may live 
agen, for though he be dead;drunk,1'le try to wake him ; Alberto, Seig- 
nior Alberto, ſtirs not, on my Conſcience he'l be the eighth Sleeper; 
why Alberto get upfor ſhame. 

Alb. Aw, aw, what the plague ails you ? 

Pro, A fine ſhort pithy mein and one it ſeems, he cares ngt to 
be anſwered too, for he's alleep already: Alberto, Alberto, wake/an, 
and get up. 

Alb. Aw, aw, what a troubleſome fellow is this? 

Pro. Why, hereare Rogues come to kill you, 

Alb. Goto e'm, and bid em itay till Iam atleiſure, Iam very buſic 
now. 

Pro; Why,: Alberto, don't you know me; I am Preſpero, I am your 
friend Proſpero, that wou'd have you wake, and go home to your Lod- 


ing. 
Y RB, Stay, ſtay, maſs1 think thou art Proſpero, indeed: 


Pro, I, 1, come, get up. Alb, Help, me then ; ſo where am 1 ? 

Pro, . Why, inthe middle of the ſtreet, 

+ Why the DevilIl am, I thought I had been at home 3 am not I 
drunk * 

Pre..As heart can wiſh ; where's your Hat, Cloak, and Sword ? 

Alb. I know nothing of them, nor any thing elſe ; nay, I am drunk,for 
I find I have ſucha taking in my limbs I cannot and, .pre'thee lead me. 

Pro, Hold faſt, then. - 

Alb. Jam. playgy- cold, I have: dreamt” of nothing but Froſts and 
Snows, pre'thee ſet fire of a houſe, and lead me to it. 

Pro, Came, let's be going.” Ab. March on, march on. [Ex amb, 

Enter Pietro and Peſauro, 

Pie, Now let's rejoyce over our late ſacceſs, as mighty Conquerors 

in time of yore over their thieving vicories, now can we my 
erves 


(38) 
Telves for three whole dayes r, be idle, laty,or be drunk, fcold 
with our - Hoſteſs, kick down the Chamber-maid, and domineer like 
Lords among their Tennants. 

Peſ. 1am all Air, three dayeshence is as far off to me;as three whole 
years; when it comes, it comes, till then we'l laugh and fing, 

Pie. Faith, thou ſay'ſt true, let's c'en celebrate this Feſtival with the 
Song / made of our fellow Thieves, that's of all the World : Hem,pox 
of this Cold, pre'thee put down thy hand, and .rake my throat. 

Peſ. Come,. ſing, I think thou halt the better pipe. 

Pie, But thou {ingeſt with more Judgment. 

Tbe Poets and Wits of all Ages and Times, 
For witily ſlealing, were Circled with Bayes : 
Old Heſiod rob'd a blind man for bis Rimes, 
And Terence new vampt another man's Playes, 
The Night does rob the Day of the Sun, 
. And Cynthia fteals her Brothers Rayes ; 
The hours do ſteal by,. and away from us rut, 
And Summer cheats Winter, to tmakg hin long dayer. 
The Souls a.quaint Thief, and does ſubtly deviſe 
. To ſteal into the Body, when firſt it comes thither, 
Ard there ſhe ſits ſafe unniil a man dyes : 
Then ſteals out again, no man knows how, or whither. 
. The Thief is the only man that lives well, 
. The World is his $lave, and Fortunes his Friend ; 
He underſtands more than the wiſeſt cantell; 
For he certainly knows what ſhall be bis end, 
Cho. Thou Kogwe, thou Cheat, thou Thief ;, Thicuts fet's alt be, 
. Sauce the World's a thief as well as we. [Dance. 
. 2 jo _ Franciſco, wit 
: Fra. So merry, poyl your ſport, by . 

Peſ. S'foot, Pierre, ——— the tleman, we are undone. 

Fra.: Dogs, havel ketch you? Tle help to mend your mirth, fo Jolly 
- with your Doxys too, =_ cowardly Curs, do you remember how you 
. Teft me to the-Mercy of my Enemies ? 

Pie,..O good Sir, forgive us, alas, we did our beſt, but what cou'd 
two poor ſtarv'd Creatures do againſt a couble of cram'd fellows that 
lives by fighting ! | 

| . Fra. No matter for that, come, if you have any Devotiensto ſay, 
con upon your mary-bones quickly, for I am refoly'd to eut your 
throats. 
'Peſ, Alas, Sir, we have neither of us our Beads about us, give vs 
but leave to go and get ſome body to help us fay 6ur prayers, and then 
uſe your pleaſure. | 
: Pie, Good ſweet Sir, be but pleag'd to make uſe of vs once again, 
an 


_ 


(39) 


and.you ſhall ſee how faithfully we will ſerve you : now our brllies are-* 


full, we can fight maidly. | 

Fre.. No, Hell-hounds, T'le truſt you no more : prepare. 

Pie, O good, good, ſweet, good, dear, fine, brave, gentle, mer- 
ciful Gentleman. 

Fra. Come, are you ready ? 

Peſ. Good Sir, we are at your m_y but for Charity ſake do not- 
kill vs, what can our deaths profit you . 

Fra, Why, if I ſhould not kill you, but employ you again, how 
fhou'd I be aſſured of your fidelity ? 

Pie, If wedon't ſerve you in any thing, be it kever ſo full of hazard, 
if you ſay but the word, then truſs us upthe next tree you come to. 

Fra, Well, Rogues, if you fail me once more,look to't, Ile have no 
mercy, 7 have work for you. 

Pie, We humbly than you, Sir, and vvill emptoy our lives to ſerve 


ou, 
? Fra, Well, the bufinefs at Griman?i's old hovſe is the thing I till por- 
poſe, to night it muſt be done, therefore if you do affiſt me,come to my 
Lodging about nine at night, aftd I'te inſtru you. 

Pie. We vvill not fail you, Sir, - 

Fra. Farevvel. [Ex. ſeverally. 

mw — I_ Flora, = Giacomo. : 

Gri., You have us'd me fine yvixt you, but you vvill repent it 
both, e're I have done vvith ol = : 

Flo. Remember your Articles, Unite. 

Gri, Well, Waſp, Tvvilt be as as my vvord; Giacomo, go 
fetch me dovvn my other Cloak, the Beaver, ahd the maſſy Gloves 
the French Count gave me at Par#?, and the knotted Cane vvith the 
great ſilver head ; I muſt be fine ro meet theſe Merchants : you Gentle- 


vvomen, I adviſe you to uſe the Liberty you have got as becomes you. - 


CEx: Gia. 

Flo. We ſhall, Sir, I cou'd vviſh you not ſtay out too late, the nights 
are ſharp, you knovy not hovv much you may vvrong your health ; in- 
deed 7 am careful of you. 

Grs, Cunning diſembling Gypfie, 7 will not hurt my elf, 7 vvarrant 
ye: give me my things, lay the others by, diſpatch and follovy me, up 
to your Chambers, F'le be at home by nine, and then 7 have ſomething 
to impart to ye: CExi Gri. 
* Orr. And vvhilt you are abroad, 7 have ſomething-to employ my 
ſelf about, if Lodovico faiFnot. 

| Enter Giacomo, 

G1a. Is my Maſtergone? - 

'_ Flo. I, Giacomo, but he fhou'd have been advis'd to take the day 
with him,tvyo heads are vvifer than one;yet novv I think on't,thoutart 
going 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
f 


nr W 
(40) 
_Soing- after him, and that vvlll be as yvell, 1; TIES 

Gi8, Will it ſo ? well Miſtreſs, I'le tell him what you ſay. . 
Flo, You had as good be hang'd. CExit Gia. 
Otr, Do'ſt think he will come, Flora ? : 
Flo, Come, I, why ſhou'd he not come ? dee think he won't come ? 
that were a g004 jeſt, [ faith, 
'Otr, 1, butif he ſhou'd not. «x 
Flo, If it ſhou'd not rain this twelve moneths, we ſhou'd have ad 
.Summer on't, Ile pawn my belt Perticoat-to afarthing Caiidle on't, 
he comes aſſoon as we hang out the Colours. | 
Drr. But what if my Father ſhou'd return ? ; | 
Flo. Piſh, fear not that, he's getting money, a Trade he loves teo 
. well, he wou'd not come back to ſave the City fireing, till he has done 
his buſineſs ? ET "ED; 0 
Otr. Pray Heaven, he don't, I am very fearful, 
Flo, Come, never be faint-hearted, Ile,go hang out the ſcarf, 
Otr; What bold deſignes have Ladventur'd on?and what Interpreta» 
.tions may they carry ? Love blinds nyc, but I have {ill this ſatisfaction 
-within my ſelf, that all my aims arg honeſt and noble, __ 
| F [Flora han2s out the ſcarf. 


.;-Flo,. Does it hang right, Coſin ? OD 
Otr. This mad Wench has don't.;. I, I,'tis well enough, come down, 
.Vle wait you in the.Parlour. [Exit -Otrante. 
EE os Enter Lodovicos 
L'd. Now I amrunning ro Pikes, this is the hour, and here's 
. the houſe, ſee the flag of defiance hung out and all, if this {hou'd be a 
trick now. to abuſe we, as why, ſhou'd I not expect it from her that 
. ſcruples not to abuſe the Church and her own Father ; If it be,'twill he 
a ſure warning to me. to meddle no more with any of theſe ſhe-vermins; 
I have no mind to be doing with this Woman now, but haog it. But 
why ſhou'd 7 live in ignorance of what it is? Vle dv't an be but to ſa- 
tisfie my Curioſity : I'le knock. S263 ia ? 
. Flo. within. Whois there, Lodovico ? 


Led, Now, ſome body pray. for me. .. - wes [Exit Lodovico. 


the Plough. .. , T7 8 00s 0, 
Sebond, of modeſty, and as. 


Flo.” Novv they are together, | Reed 
Orr.” You ſec hovv I have tranſgre 


#5 \& # # 


Led. Madam, you ſce,hayy. vvilling,7am to ſexve ye, 1 have con- 
quer'd an-humovr that vvas almg;} -nyangiple, to come 09. ſce 19 
de ereforc 


; (41) | 
therefore let me beg that employment you lave for me to do, let me 
do it quickly, for / amlike fiſh out of the vvater here; -come, Madam 
if you pleaſe to ſend your Coin off, ' - 

Otr. What de'e mean, Sir ? | | 

Lod, O, let's vvithdravv into your Chamber, there's a pallet ſcre, 

Flo. O brave, no more butup and ride. 

Otr. Bleſs me, '7 am miſtaken, in the man: is this the brave, the 
noble hoge(t Lodevico ? this luſtful Villain, ] | 

Lod, Nay, Madam, pray let's diſpatch, you have a mind 1 ſhoul# 
begin to Yillanore ; Tam ready, why do youltay ? 

Flo. Is this the Courtſhip you uſe to Women ? 

Lod, Why, do they uſe to be Courted otherwiſe ? 

Otr, Yes,” Monſter, honeſt Women do, is this the ſcorning all our 
Sex, and bidding defiance to Women ? | thought you had:been-noble 
minde4, and-not to have been won from ſtti& humour, but by the 
pitch of Vertue, which perhaps you thought none of us cver arrived at, 
an+ I reſolv'd to ſhew you 1 was Miſtreſs of, 

*Led. Why, are you honeſt, then ? 

Flo, Marry gap, there'sa queſtion ſpur'd. - : 0tr. Are youa Knave ? 

Led, Nay, 'tis as expected, / thought 7 ſhog'd be abus'd, 7 knew: 
well enough no woman cou'd love me; 'and yet 7 muſt run my ſelf into 
the Brycrs, Sr4y 

Orr, 1 hate you now, more than ever 7loyed you ? you have your 
anſwer, Sir, there lycs your way, and'now report women have vertue 
and honour. | | | 

Lod. Honeſt, ſay you ? hang me if I am not turning, pray Madam, 
ſtay alittle, let me look upon you On my Conſcienceyou are the firſt 
woman / ever talkt to. | | | 

Orr, Well, look on, Sir, (hang me, 7love him ſtill ) 

Led. She is handſom,ſhe's rich,ſhe's vertuous, ſuch'a woman is made 
to be loved for certain,& why ſhou'd not love her?pox 1 will love her, 
- Orr, Have you look't enough,” Sir? _ £3 nl | 

.Lod, 1 ſhall never,. can you forgive me, Madam ?: 1am become 
penitent, and*'your Convert, Orr, If you are truly ſo, 1can.:« 

I od. 1 never ſaid my prayers more heartily than 7 repent : but can 

you love metoo? * Ortr, If your intents be noble, 
.."Lod, Madam, they are Chaſt as your unſpotted- ſelf; I was'a He- 
retick to love when I came hither, but now 7am happily your proſclite. 
Otr, Thanks to my fate,then here receivea hand,and with that hand 
a heart that has been yours, fince firſt you made the Ramport of my 
honour; yet do not think me light by being ſo free; / love ye, 1confeſs, 
but vertue in you More than your perſon; and if you leave that, 7 muſt 
forſake to'ther, Lead, Ile leave my being firſt. 
Fl. Well, now 1 ſee[they will-bave one another, 


G Otr 


(48-) 

Qtr, Heark, Flora, what noiſe is that ? Knocking within, 

Flo, Noiſe ; I hear no noiſe, *tis.but your fancy. o_ E within, 

Otr., Heark, again; O me, my fears. 

Flo, Marry ſome body, knocks'indeed, 7hope not my Uncle, 

Lod, You have not brought me, to betray me, Lady, ' 

Orr, Alas, I love you,, too too well, 7” 3 

an mo, —_— - Miſtreſs, Madam Flora, þ 

Flo, O, hang him,. 'tis my Sweet-heart, Alberto ; he's =# 
and the wine hallows in his head. $ 2c's gorren-tog 

Otr. lam glad 'tis not my Father. 

Lod, For Heavens ſake let him in, he's-in a rare humour, 

Flo. He'l but trouble us, Ile ſend him away. a 

Lod, Good Madam, bring him in, "it will berare ſport. 

Alb, within ſings. 39 rook, her about the. middle /o ſmall 
And threw her upon the ground, LG 

Flo. He will never be quiet till he be let in. 

Otr, Beſhrew me, I was ſorely frighted, \ 

Lod. Well, Madam, fince we are thus well agreed, when ſhall we the 
married? now Iam for it as much as ever Lwas againſt it, pray ſayto!. 
morrow. | 

'Gtr. That's a little too ſhort warning... 

Lod. Not for a haſty bargain in Love. 

Enter Alberto, pulling in Flora, aud ſmging. 
* Alb. He took her about the middle ſa ſmall, | 
And threw her upon the ground, 

Flo, 1f you have any, more of that Song, Uie turn you out of door as. 

vain ; you will never leave this Ribaldry, you are ina ſweet pickle, 
* Alb. Bravely ſcoul'd, wench, Ile ſo ſmuggle: thee, 

Flo. Stand away, and leave fooling;where's your Sword and cloak ? 

Alb. Vaniſht, gone; Hat, and all run away,lI borrowed this juſt now 

our Herb-woman tg come &ſee thee : Ah ho Seignior Lodovico, got 
ſo near my Coin, that.mult be, 7am glad toſee it : Madam, this is the 
C—_ Itold you of, take him upon my word, he's as good a piece 
of Stuff —— | 

Lod, The Rogue is ſelling me in Drapers phraſe. 

Otr. He's beholdingto.you, Seignior Alberrv, * 

Alb. Marry is he, and more he ſhall be: come, when is't a match, 
Llong to be taking off a- garter, I'le go find out the-01d man and ſpeak a 
good word for you preſently. | 

Led. Ha, ha, ha, he is as hot in the head as an Oven, on my Con- 
ſcience, and he ſhou'd light on him, he wou'd do it. | 

Alb. . Come, let's fing a catch, hang forrow, let's be merry. 

Fle. Go home and ſleep. 

Alb, Would'it have me ſleep evealaſtingly ?- 1 have been wo _ 
| already, 


(43) 
already ; once inthe High-ways, "and fince undera Bed, and yet alf 
won't-do't, | | 

Fle. Heark ye, Alberto, you thuſt needs be gone, you diſturb your 

friend and my Colin in their Conference,pray go and come agen to mor- 
row, and Fle ſpeak with ye, 

i. Alb. Well, I ſee you have a mind to berid of me, fare you well, uſe 

your time- whilſt you have it, and be married quickly, leſt the old man 
ore-ſall the Market. | 

"Flo. I = _ a A - him, I muſt lock him out: 

Led, *Tisan honeſt drunken Raſcal, 
But he gives us good advice; pray Ma- yr $ = erto 4nd Flo, 
dam, let's be married tomorrow, I am od EaoET +1 
loth to truſt my ſelf, for fear 1 ſhou'd cobl again. | 

Otr, SoamItoo. Why, is yourlove ſo weakly grounded ? 

Lod, Not ſo, but you know 'tis a ſtrange thing to me, and I like it 
ſo well, 1 wou'd not be tempted from-it ;, good Madam, if you love me 
half ſo well as1 love you, you will grant I am ſyte. 

Otr, 'Twill be a mad adventure,what will people ſay of us? beſides, 
how can it be done ? 

Lod, Madlet it be, and let them talk till their hearts ake; when 'tis 
done,'tis done, let me alone to continue it.I'le bring a couple of friends 
to night, and Alberto ſhall be one of them, if your Cofin Flore will con- 
trive tolet us in at the Garden Gate, we will convey you ſafely to my 
Houſe, Ile have a Prieſt ready, and we will all four to work: come, 
Madam, 1 know you are ſo good Natur'd, you will not deny it. 

Flo, Faith Colin, you muſt e'en do't, ſtrike while the Iron is hot, 
now or never. 

Otr. But what will my Father do? 

Flo, He will marry you to Yillanore, if you don't, and then you may 
repent at leiſure, what ſay you? 

Otr. Well, I will do't, but I am very fearful. | 

Led. That word makes me live,Madam,we will be here abouttwelve 
without fail; you will be ready. | 

Flo, Ile warrant you, Tle manage things within doors; 'ne're look 
melancholy for the matter, it will be but one Brunt o'th Old man's an- 
ger, and when the ſtorm's over, all will be well again. 

Otr, Pray Heaven, it may ; heark again, another knock, if this be 
my Father Iam ruin'd. 


Flo. Tlego ſee. | [Exit Flora, 

Lod, Come, do not fear, my faireſt, all will be well; how now, who 
_ ; 1 

Flo, Alas, undone, 'tis my Uncle and his Man. 

Otr. Ay me. _ DShe fake, 


Flo, Look to her,is this a time tofaint in? callup your ſpicics, muſics 
Gz a 


7 (44) 
all your wits to avert the Storm that threatens. you; 
'Gri. within, Davghter, Neece, the Devil, are you all deaf, 

Flo, Who is't that keeps a noiſe there? Diſpatch, do ſome what or 
other, quickly. | 

__ Gri. within. Your Uncle, Flor, 

Zed, I have a Sword, Iam ſure will bring me off.” 

Otr. O, donot ufe it, that will ruin us, 

Flo, You my Uncle,. you ate ſome cunning Rogue that knows he's * 
Bone from home, and come terobhim ; troop up, or clſc I'le waſh you 
from the door ; diſpatch, for ſhame. 

Otr, Dear Lodovico, get under the Table, and lye there cloſea little, 
we'l contrive him off ſome. way preſently, 

Gri. within, *'TjsI, Grimani my ſelf, you know my voice, 

Lod, Well, if there be no remedy, I mult : this is a judgment, come 
cover me, aml hid ? 

Flo. Well enough, Ile let him in. CExit Flora, 

Orr, Heaven be propitious now, or I am loſt for ever, I muſt take 
heed my hopes betray me not, 

Enter Grimani, Flora, aud Giacomo. 

Gri, This is fine, that I muſt ſtand at my own door fo. long, and 
none of you vouchſafe to.letme in. 

Orr. Indeed our care-injur'd our duty, we not expected your return 
fo ſoon, and ſo thought it might have been ſame one. clſe that came 
with bad intents. | os 

Gri. Indeed returned ſooner than I thought for,what were you and 
your Coſin doing now ? 

. F!s, Uncle, we were piecing your old Ruffs in the neck, you wear 
them out extreamly behind... _ 

Gri, Wel}, lay by your work, we will have a game at Cards, Giaco- 
20, £0 fctch ſome Cards and Counters, picket, you play well at it. - 

Exit Giacomo. 

Otr. 'Tam no Gameſter, bot if you pleaſe to play, Ile have a fire 

made in your Chamber, the Weather's cold, 
Enter Giacomo with Cards, 

Grz. No, no, 'tis well enough here, fit down ; come, lift, I deal, how 
many take you in ? 

Orr, (1 fear | ſhall be diſcovered) 1 take ſeven, Sir. 

Gri. Takethem, and f will have all the reſt, So now, what fay you 
to the point ? 

Orr, Alittle game, ſome three and fifty, 

Gri, *Tis good hunch out, 

Orr. Quart Major. | . 

Gri, And that too, Ithink the Dog's got vnder the Table, 
- Flo. Ifhe be found, .he will be made a Puppy of. 


br. Orr.: Three Kings, | G1, 


(45) 


Gri, No, that's not good : come out, this Cur. 
Otr. Nine, and there's ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, 
Gri. I had forgot my Aces; this filthy Dog will bite me by the ſhins, 
anon. 
Orr. No, Sir, 'Tis a gentle Cur. 
You have lot your Aces fourteen; | 
Gri. Come out, and be hang'd, or Ile fetch you out. . 
Fls. I muſt have a trick for this, I ſee. 
| Otr. Pray Sir, let him alone, he will not hurt you. | 
| Gri, Go fetch-me the Dog-whip z -an-ugly Cur, no other place to » 
fleep in, out, out, to Kennel Bull ; go fetch me the whip, I ſay. 
Enter Flora with a piece a paper and aCandle, ' 
Gia, Te be hang'd if the dog be there, this is ſome kind of Miſtery 
| or other. 
. Gri. Icannot play for this Dog ; out, out, I ſay. 
Flo, Hel foul the'Houſe if you beat him, Uncle, 
Gri, Then you may make it clean again, 
[Flora pins the paper behind him, fires it, 
Flg, Alas the day, fire, fire, Uncle, look about you, 
Gri, Where? where? O thou damn'd Quean, 
CEx Grimani rumming after Flora, 
Orr, Ha, ha, ha, this plaguy Wench has helpt us out at a pinch ; up, 
up, Ledovico, and be gone quickly, : 
Led. Well, 1 think you have had tryal enough of my love, Iwou'd 
not endure ſuch another bout for tke 'Dukedom, Farewell. 
B) [Exit Lod, 
Orr, 1 will not fail you, this Wench will be brain'd, here he comes, 


he has miſt her, 
Enter Grimani and Giacomo, 
Gri, Hell and damnation, loſt her too, Ile burn her for a witch, afſ- 
ſoon as I find her ; are you there ſtill, go, Magpy, up to your Cage, Ile 


trunce you; Sirrah, look about for her, and bring her me. 
% . [ Exennt aur Ard Gri, 


Gia. No, Maſter, Ile keep her out of your clutches as long as can,. 
T have locked her in the Buttery, or ſhe had been worried before this 
time. 


| Enter Alberto, 
Alb, You Squire of the body, are not you Griman:'s man ? 
Gia. Yes, Sir, what then? howcam youinto the houſe ? 
Alb.- On my leggs, and-in at that door, how ſhould /comein; go 
tell your Maſter / wou'd ſpeak with him. 
Gia, This is like the fellow that rob'd me, but that he has not ſuch 
a beard, Ile call. him to you. 


Alb, Now am I juſt mad enough to doany kind of miſchief, know 
| no + 


(36) 

- no more than a Horſe what to ſay to Grimans, I have no bulineſs with 

him; but 7 will talk to him however, 7have had a whisking rattle, 
Enter Grimani and Giacomo, 

Gri, Whois this wou'd ſpeak with me ? 

Gia. That's he, Sir. 

Gri, What's your buſineſs with me? | 

Alb. Nay, be not angry, ſweet Senator, /come out of kindneſs ts 
ſce you, knowing 7 am to be your kinſman ſhortly, 

Gri. You my kinſman, upon what acquaintance ? 

Alb. Only by marriage, Sir, your pretty Neece and / feel our pulſes 
beat one towards agother. | 

Gri. Raſcal, come to abuſe mein my own houſe. 

Alb. _ ood Uncle, that muſt be : no anger, I beſeech you, 7 
thave other buſineſs with you, namely, to ſpeaka goed word to you in 
.behalf of a civil young Gentleman, my acquaintance, one Scignior Lo- 
Aovico, that has a moneths mind to your pretty Daughter. ' 

Gri. Has he ſo? this is very fine, and you are afine impudent Rogue 
to prate to me thus, 

Alb. Ha, ha, ha, take heed, Anthpuitie, you will drop a tile by and 
by if you wear out your ſelf ſo faſt, 

Gri. Out of my doors, ſlave, /can be abus'd faſt enough by my own 
-people; out of my doors,if / light of you and your fellow Rogue, I will 


make Rogues of you, 


Alb. Ha, ha, ha. 
Gri, De'eyegrin and be hang'd ; Giacomo, go fetch me my long 
Sword; out of my doors, if thou itay'lt till / come down again, 7'le cut 


thy throat, Rogue ; Ragamuffian, 7 will, 
CExeunt Gri. and Gia, 


Alb, Ha, ha, ha,ha,how have baited this old Coxcomb;but am not 
Ta puppy, thus to talk to him ? Now will theſe two poor Wenches be 
mew'd up,1 ſee I muſt go ſleep the other bout;or 7 ſhall never be ſober, 


this drunkenneſs ſpoils me. 

But that and I ſo well agree, 

That 1 ſhall ne're leave that, till that leaves me. , [Ex#, 

Aftus quintus, 
Enter Lodovico, Proſpero, and Alberto. 
Pro. Ive you good Ev'n, Seignior, or if you pleaſe, pood mor- 
I row, how goes it with you ? 

Alb. Faith, with much ade 7am got ſober now, and that's all, 
Lod, 'Twas more than time, you were ina rare Condition this af 


ternoon whenyou came to ſee your Miſtreſs. 
Alb. Pox, I was ſober enough todo buſineſs, and 7 think 7 did you 


Come fimple ſervice too, 7am ſure 1did my endeavour, 
Led. Why, whas did you forme ? 4 


| (47) 
 Atb. E'ne as] told you, I found out the old and ſpoke 
word for my ſelf, and two for you. Pr | OT 

Lod, Why, was the Devil in thee? thou haſt ruin'd all, ſure thoy 
doſt butjeſt.. 

Alb. 'Tis e'ne as ſure as that was hot headed, 7ſtumbled into the 
ew knew not how, lighted upon him and ſpoke the ſweeteſt words - 
to him. 

Lod, Was'ther ever ſuch a drunken Raſcal, to do theſe mad things ? 
Prethee what did he = to thee? F 

Alb, He looked as it he had juſt come from the Bear-garden, and 
had himſelf been baited inſtead of the beaſt ; he ſtampt, raved, and : 
fum'd ſo, that 7 ſhou'd have been afraid he wou'd have caten me if he 
had had any teeth. ; 

Led, This has given him ſuch an Alarum, that if this nights oppor- 
tunity ſhou'd be let ſlip, there were no hopes hereafter to ground an. 
attempt ; and this is the hour, I dare not doubt you will not ſtick tome, 
Proſpero, 1 wiſhthere were athird Miſtreſs for thee too. 

Pro. Ile be careful as if there were, 7 doubt not but 7 ſhall fiad one 
time enough, to be weary of before 1 dy. 

Lod. You two ſtand here, 7le go knock at the Garden-gate, and if 
Flora be as good as her word, Te fetch youboth preſently. 

Exit Lod. 

Pro, If we ſhou'd light of the old man now, we Hhou' have mad | 
work. 

Alb. If we'do, letme alone to talk with him, I ha* got the trick 
on't. | 
Enter Lodovico and Flora, 

Flo,” All things are ready, my Colin is in the low Parlouf, and. my | 
Uncle isin Bed ; are your friends prepar'd ? 

Lod. Here they are, oneof themis your acquaintance. 

Flo, You are a ſweet drunken Youth. 

., Alb. No more of that, good Lowbel. 
V Lod. Come, let's away to our buſineſs ; that done, we ſhall have 
time to talk. | 

Alb. 1, and to do too, I hope ; come, lead up, Madam, we'l follow - 
in Rank and File. | [ Exeunt omnes 

Enter Franciſco, Pietro, Pefauro, with a dark, Lanthorn. 

Pie. We have wrencht the Bar without noiſe ; wearein Sir, there - 
is ſo much of our promiſe perform'd. 

Fra. *Tis well, do but the reſt as well, and then 7 will ſay you ate 
brave fellows. 

Peſ. | warrant you, Sir. . 

Fra, Stay you two here, while 1go in futther into the houſe,and ſtir 


not a foot till I'call you ; Iwill be with you preſently... [Ex# F _ | 
| | Ws - 


(48) 
'Pie, «Come, Peſauro,in the mean time let us employ our ſelves j 
' callings, let's ſee what's to be got, where is the Stye ? ri 
find the Pigs. wit agar. 

Peſ. We'l have them ſtraight, if the old Sow grunt not, 

Pie, Come, tothe ſearch, look there, what's in that hole ? this is 
the —__— , here's only a ſcrup broom, two Billets, and three Char- 
coals. 

- - Peſ.. Search further min, there may be gold in the bottom, 

Pu, Here's an old Frying pan without a handle, I'le lay my ears 'tis 
the old mans Caudle cup, / think I have a pipkin by the face too 
Diabola, Pefanro, I am Catch'd in a Rat-trap, that has bit me by the 
vngers damnably; looſe me-and cat themeat for thy pains, 

Pef. Ha, ap - rage you are looſe, to't again, 

Pie. Tam half atraid, 1 have hat fair warming; what's h 
lhooes anda backer full of duſt, che, ms 

Pe/. Search further, [Shows a yellow cloſe-ſtool ſear, 

P:e, Here's nothing elſe but old Cords and rotien es af an bas 
clouts, and's pong rs a Rm 

Peſ. Let's ranſack ſome where elſe, I warrant a-prize ; let's {, 
wo_ Cup-boards in tke Walls? ; WO NS INGOE 

P:e. They lye incognito, if there be any, I ſee none; {tay,here's one, 
hold the Lanthorn, 


Peſ. What haſt thou got, Boy ? 
Pre. Maſs, here is an old black long skirted doublet, -pinck Sattin 5 


on the breaſt and ſleeves behind, Canvas or Buckram, excellent Hug. 
bandry ; and here's a pair of muſty Lamb-skin Drawers, an old ſheath, 
and a Comb with five teeth, a little greafie red Cap and Glove, and a 
Cat-skin'purſe, but -not a penny of money in it. 

Peſ. The old man's Wardrobe ſure enough ; pox on't, we arelike 
to make but a blew night on't, if we ſteal nothing -but Duſt and Cob. 


webbs. 
Pie. [know not what to think on't, there is no venturigg further ig. 


to the houſe, leſt we be ſurpris'd, + 4 

Peſ. Plague, 7 did not come hither to do miſchief, 

| Enter Lodovico, 

P;e. Peace, 'man, here's the Gentleman, 

Peſ. Plague on't, he has hindred a good work, 

Lod. 1wonder what is become of my two friends ; all's ready, but 
2 have loſt them inthe houſe. t 

Pie. Seignior? | Lod. Qhere they are, Proſpero ? Alberto ? 

Peſ. Seignior Franciſco ? Lod, How, Franciſeo, who's there ? 
. Pie, Weare here, Sir. 

Led. You, whoareyou? Tam miſtaken, 7find. 

Pie. We are Pierro and Peſanro,' that broke the houſe for ye ; hav 

. Lo®E 


J vu got her, Sir ? . 0 


(49) 

Lod. What Myſtery is this ? Frenciſco broke into the Houſe. 

Pie. If you had ſtaid a little longer we had fir'd the houſe that we 
might have all run away ſafe by the light. 

Led, Had you ſo, Dogs, |'ie make you ſure. 

Peſ. We are miſtaken, 'tis Lodovico, have at you, Sir. [Fight 

Led. Yield Villains. 

Pie. There is no good to bedone, we muſt run for't. 

Led, What a damn'd misfortune is this? ſee muſt have another 

bout with Franciſco, I had better ne'er have been in Love, but muſt 

through, this Lanthorn may do me ſome ſervice. [Exit Lod. 
Enter Proſpero and Alberto, 

Alb. Did you hear Lodovico's voice ? 

Pro. Yes, andloud too, he has met with ſome reſiſtance ſure, but 
all's huſh't, - wou'd he wou'd come. 

Enter Franciſco. 

Fra, Unleſs my ears deceived me, I heard a noiſe and claſhing of 
Swords, I wou'd I were off ſafe, O here are my Rogues, I hear their 
tread, Pietro ? ; 

Alb. O, are you there I thought we had loſt you, 

Pro. What made you foloud, have you met with any danger ? 

Fra. You Raſcals, do you fall out with one another, and make a 
noiſe to ruin me ? Alb. Raſcals, Lodovico ? 

Fra, How, Lodovico! the Devils in't,what's the meaning of this? 

Enter Lodovico, 

Lod. Alberto ? Proſpero ? 

Alb. Who's there ? What two Lodovice's ? this is his voice; 

Lod, Why do ye ſtare ſo, what's the matter ? 

Pro. Here's a fourth got amongſt us, 

Alb. A Devil, I am afraid 'tis, 

Led. Nay, there's more than ſo, whete is he ? 

Fra, Here he is Lodovico, I care not for your odds, 

Lod. Here, Proſpero, hold the Candle to us, nay, keep up your 
Sword, I'le have none to help me, I have made his two Comrades va- 
riſh already, 

Fra, You may chance need them, Sir. 

' Lod, Ile venture that, nay more to whet your Courage, we will 
diſpute it for Otrante now, Iam become your Rival as well as —_ 
[Fs ht, 

Fra, Win her, and wear her, l 

Alb. 'Tis a ſtout Rogue, he won't down. 

Lod, Stay, breath a little, thou haſt Courage Franciſco, if thou hadit 
_— too, thou wert a brave man, pre'thee be honelt ye!, "and ſave 
thy life. 

Fra, Save your own, Ile lookto mine, __—_ nay, come -_ 
0 


(50). 
Lod. Forbear friends, asFou love me, then I ſee you are reſoly'd 
to pull your Deſtiny upon you, . - '* (Fight. Fran. f als. 
Fra, I cou'd curſe now, ! 
Lod, May Heaven forgive you, and not impute thy blood to me, 
Alb, Are you not hurt? - Lod. No, I thank my Fate, 
Emer Otrante and Flora, 
Orr. O Gentlemen, what. dc'e mean? -will-you kill one another ? 
the noife has waked my Father, he's getting up, and we are all-undone. 
Lod, No, faireſt, ſee there, who made the Quarrel. 
Alb. He's like to make nq more.- 
Flo, 'Tis Franciſco, | hope ye are ſatisfied with this Sacrifice. 
Orr, Alas, Inever wiſht forſo fatal a revenge. 
Pro. 'Come, you ſtand talking, and will be ſurpriz'd, if you intend 
tq be ſafe you-muſt take this very minute, thenext will be too late. 
Lod, True, Madam, come, we mult eſcape now or never, 
Otr, Alas, I know not what todo, lead me whither you will, 1 
care not. what becomes of me. 
Alb, Come, Madam Flora, you and 7 mult Ramble together too, 
away, away, make haſt, [ Exeurr Lod. Pro. Alb. Otr, and Flora 
Fra." muſt bear the-ſhame bf all, I have a little Life left yet, and 
that I will employ to do more miſchief if I can, 
Emer Grimani and Giacomo with a Servant, 
ariving in Pietro and Peſauro. 
Gri, Rogues, Dogs, Thieves, confeſs, or I'le torture your ſouls out, 
Pie, O good Sir, good Sir, we will confeſs all, look, here is the 


Gentleman. 
Gia. O Maſter, Maſter, my young Miſtreſs and Miſtreſs Flora are 


gone, carried away together, 

Fra, Peace, Rogues, and I'le make all well yet. 

Gri, O the Devil, what have [ deſerved to be thus uſed ? Curſe on 
you for all ſleepy Curs, what's that lyes there ? What a man kill'd - 
who are you ? | 

Fra, Good Sir, put off your Anger, and receive the laſt words of a 
dying man, and one that dy'd in ſerving you. 

Gri, That's a likely matter, run for the Watch ſome of you, the 
reit ſecure thoſe Villains. 

Fra, In ſhort, for I have ſcarce breath left enough to ſpeak all Cir- 
cumitances, Lodovico, if you ever keard hisname. 

Gri, Yes, that was the Rogue, the mad drunken Raſcal prated to 
- me of about my Davghter, I ſuſpected him. 

Fra, He t:mpted me, theſe two, Sir, and ſome others this night to 
help him ſteal away your Daughter, | ; 

Gri, Very good, then you were one of the Raviſhers. 


Fr4, 1 muſt confeſs my friendſhip to hirh urged me to do a thingmy 
nature 


(51) | 

nature trembled at, but when at laft we came into-your Houſe, truck 
with the horror of the approaching Villany, I oyed all the Rheto- 
rick Thad, hoping { might avert him from his purpoſe, he deaf to all 
perſwaſions, firſt grew angry, 'gave me ill Language, and then drew 
upon me; I vowed he ſhou'd not compaſs his deſign unleſs he went 
through me, we fought, but Fortune favour'd the unjuſter Sword, and 
here [ fell to tell 'you this ſad tory and my Repentance,and thank my 
Fate that" I had ſo much life left. . . Gri, Is this true ? | 

Fra, I amnot jn a Condition to diſſemble now. | | 

Gri, Where are' the Watch? | 

Enter Servants, Conſtable, and Watch. 

Ser, They are here, Sir, four Bill-men, ſtout and ſtrong, Mr, Con- 
ſtable is their ſpeaker. | | 

Gri, You keep good ward to letmen of my Rank be rohb'd, while you 
lye ſnorting.in your Rugs, *. | | 

Conſt. We have not eyes, Sir, tolook every way. 

Gri, You ſhall be made ſo to have, take theſe two Raſcals into your 


Cuſtody, and keep them ſafe, _ | 
1 Watch,. Come up you, ſneaking Rogues, or Ile run my Bill into 


your Buttocks, | , | 
Pie. O, Peſauro, what will become of us? the Gentleman's devout ly- 


ing has done us no good. | | 

Gri, Two of you threecarry that wounded man, and lay him upon a 
Bed, and get him a Chyrurgeon, if he be honeſt he deſerves it. if not, 
he ſhall be hang'd as ſoon as he is well, Come,Conttable,I am robb'd, 
my LExennt Fra,” ſupported with two Servants. 
Houſe broke open, wy Daughter and Neece ſtoln, can you find the 
Rogues ? LEE 1 

Conſt, I warrant you, Sir, 'tis*no hard matter to ſent them out, 1 
and my Mirmidons will quickly unkennel them, we'l draw them like 


Blood-hounds. 3 
Gri. To the ſearch then, come, Giacomo, come all, O that 7ſhou'd 


live to ſee this curſe. [Exit Omnes, 
Enter Lodovico, Otrante, Alberto, Flora, 
and Proſpero, | 
Alb. The day is broke, that's one comfort, we ſhall have no more 
breaking of ſhins, did I not hurt you, Madam, when we were down to- 


gether e'en now ? Flo. No, Good-man fool, 
Lod, We are got as far as the Covent ggeady, wou'd we cou'd light 
on a hedge Prieſt. 


Orr, Alas, what ſhall we do? If my Father find us, we areutterly 
loſt, cannot ſtand his Anger. : 
Lod, Be comforted my faireſt, I will ſecure you from. all danger. 
Enter Dominico, © * | 
Pre. Look, here is Father Dominice, H2 Otr. 


| (52) 

Otr .Alas, how can I look upon him, that has abus'd him ſo ? 

Lod., Fear not, 7 will to him, good day, Father. 

Dom, Lodovico, out wretch, come'not near me, I have taken order 
that you ſball be handled as you deſerve, 

Led. Your patience, Father, you muſt be diſabus'd, know then the 
thing that raiſes @ll your Anger, was a mcer plot betwixt Orrante and 


me,you were employed becauſe we thought it ſafeſt, ts hide our Loves 
from her old jealous Father, 


Dom, Tut, tut, this is but tattle. 


Alb. Nay, an't won't believe Fryer, here is the Lady her ſelf to 
witneſs, ask her. 
Dom. How, Otrante, and with him, at this hour too ? 


Orr, Your pardon, holy Sir, I muſt confeſs [have abps'd ye, but 
you muſt blame my Love, Lodovice tells you true. 


Dom, Tam amazed, but what make you here, now ? 

Lod The truth is, we have ſcapt from her Fathers houſe, and our 
requelt to you is, that you wou'd joyn oyr hands. 

Dom Notl, Fle haveno ſhare in your guilt. 

Led. Pray Sir, wehave no aims but what axe honeft. 


Alb. If you doit not, Fryer, they will do worſe, go to it without 
Ceremony, and then that will be your fault. 
Dom, Heaven forefend, arc you willing to this, Lady ? 
Alb. Come, leave examining her, you will but make her bluſh, ft- 
lence gives conſent, | 
' Dom, To hinder you from falling into greater ruin, I will do it, but 
Jknow not how to anſwer it. 
: 20 I muſt deſire a caſt of your Office too, for, this Virgin and my 
E = 0 


Dom, One is too much, R 


Alb. Nay, we will not ask you twice, if you won't, we'l take one 
anothers word, and ſave Charges. 


Dom, Well, if it muſt be, there's no remedy, come along with me. 
i Lod. Beſt, Sir, we thank ye, * [Exeunt Ones, 
Enter Grimani, Giacomo, Conſtable, Watch, 
Pictro and Peſauro. 
Gri, You arcidle Raſcals, you can do nothing, go afide again, and 
fearch diligently, find them, or I will have them all whipt. Do you 
know any of theſe people we [Ex. ſome of the VV atch. 


are ſcarching after, .if you do, confeſs, or 7 will have you both hang'd. 
Pie, We know nothing Q all. | 


Enter VV atch with Proſpero. 


Pro, Unhand me uncivil ſlaves, what do you hale me thus for ? 
1 FYVatch. Herc's ond ſhall tell you : here's oag.of them. 


Gri, That's well, how now, ſtubborn Sir, were you one of Lode- 
_ nico's 


(53) 
vice's Companions, that helpt him to ſteal my Daughter ? Speak 
Rogue, ſpcak quickly. 

Þro. 1 am Lodovico's friend, but no Rogue. 

Gri. No, I'le make one of you, confeſs, >irrah, quickly where they 


are, or Ile noſe ye preſently. 
Pro. Why firſt, 7 don't know, and ſecondly, I wou'd not tell you, if 


d. 

Gr. I ſhall pull that humour down, clap matches to his fingers, will 
youconfels yet ? 

Pro, Yes, thus much I will, your Daughter is married, Sir, and 
nobly too, to Lodovico, a Gentleman that has both blood and fortune to 
deſerve her, the News is too good for you. 

Gri, O Devil, Raſcal, married already, and gone but two hours. 

Pro, "Tis very true. 

Gri, It cannot be, 'tisa Rape, a Rape, Villains, they have-Who- 
red her, tell me where they are, or-------- 

Pro. Let one word anſwer you,7 willnot tell you though 7 dye for't. 

Gri. Away with him, take him and torture him,till you wring it out - 
of him, come all away and ſearch. 

Pro, Te ſtand all tryals e*'re I wrong my friend, [Ex Ones, 

Enter Lodovico, Otrante, abs and Flora. 
| Lod, Novv, Madam, I may boldly call you mine. 
Ozy. 1 ſhou'dbe happy in ſuch an Owner, but that I apprehend ſuch 
dangerous Conſequence from my Fathers anger. 
| Lod. Fear it not, Otrante, Ile ſtand betvvixt thee and all Storms, 
| $ vvhen he ſees that vve are married, his reaſon vvill make him lay aſide 
* his ſruiteleſs paſſions, come, do not vveep, 'tis a bad Omen, 
Alb. Well, Flora, Thave caught thee in a Church-trap at laft, you 
ſhan't flip out of my fingers any more. | 
| Fls, 1am yours, you had beſt make much of me, you will not light 
of ſuch another vvhen I am gone. - 

Alb. Trothl hope [ ſhan't, 

- Orr. Heark,vvhat noiſe of Tramplings that? O the Storm isa com- 
i ing. [ Netfe within, 
| V/Yuhin, Somelook to that Corner,.the reſt follovy here, 

Flo. It comes, it comes, vvhere is Seignior Proſpero ? 

Lod. I miſt himnottill novy,I doubt they have ſnapt him,come Ma- 
dam, ftand behind.me, do not tremble; I'le vvarrant you. 

Alb. Come, do you play at Bo-peep, behind me too, there is no 2. 
- yoiding them, they come. [Noiſe within, 
Enter to them Grimani, Giacomo, Conſtavle, Y/atch, 
guarding Proſpero, Pietro a4 Peſauro, 


Grs, Here theyye, here they are, dovvn vvith them, take'em, kill 
them if they do ref. ; 
re you come upon your deaths, . ®#ra 


Led, Stand 0 | 


(54) 
' Pro,” Nay, Iwill help ye once more. (Pro; breaks from ther. 

Gri, Take them, you Cowardly dogs, 990 VA w_ 
Why did you let that fellowſlip there? & _. | 

Conſt. Gentlemen, -you won't reſiſt the Officers of Juſtice. 

Lod, No: but wemult make our own ſafties, Seignior Grimar, 'I 
© beſeech you hear me, Sir, let not your paſſion blind you to the loſs of 
reaſon, if you will be temperate we'l yield our ſelves, 

Gre,.I'leno Capitulations, Villains, Raviſhers, Sjeze on them, 1 
won't hear them ſpeak, 

Alb. Why then have at your venerable Ruff. 


..Flo, Hold, hold, let me charge him. Flora ſnatches a 
Gri. Thou won't murther me, ſlave, wilt thou ?4 Sword, and rakes 
- Alb. Not if. you will give us free quarter, towards Grimani, 


Conſt. Pray hcar the Gentleman, Sir, 

Led. 1 mult confeſs I have offenied, Sir, we come to beg your par- 

don, Sir, but as Raviſhers and Villains,we cannot ask forgiveneſs,thofe 
Titles are not due to us, your Daughter and Neece ſtill own the ſelf 
ſame honour and Chaſtity they brought into the World with them. 

Gri, Piſh, piſh, this is but a flam,l know they are abus'dgdiſhononr'd, 

Oty. O, do not think ſo, Sir, upon my knees I beg it, however Love 

has made mt faulty,l have preſerv'd my honour ſtill from ſtain.dear Sir, 
forgive me, and forget my follies, I am your Child, Sir, let a'Fathers 
pitty prompt-you to mitigate your killing anger. 

Flo. What if I ſhou'd beg, Uncle, would not that pleaſe you? Re- 
member you cou'd never brimg me upon my knees yet, what ſay you ? 
ſhall / down?ſhall I bend? Grz, 1 will never forgive thee,if thou beggeſt, 

Alb. What wou'd you have more, Sir ? | 

Gri. All's one, honeſt or diſhone{t, Ple have them both hang'd fieze 
on them, get more ſtrength, ; 

Led. Keep off upon your perils, hard hearted Old man, had I not 
twice ſto0J up their honours Reſcue they had indeed been prey to Ra- 
viſhers,once at your Garden-gate,when bold Franciſco had made them 
his priſoners, with this hand 1 freed them, and returned them ſafe. 

Orr, *Tis true indecd, Sir, *twas his Nobleneſs which then preſerved 
-us from a certain ruine, 

Flo, Have ſome manners, and cry thanks yet, Sir, 

Gri, Be quiet, Gypfic, or I'le---------- 

Lod. Again to night, the ſame man had defign'd a ſecond Rape, bur 
that our happy Stars dire&ed us to fruitrate his attempts. 

Gri, How dar'{t thou tell me this abominablzlye, when one of thy 
own Companions, whom thou haſt almo't killed. for giving thee good 
advice, told me that thon had'ſt hired him and theſe two Rogues and 
-ſome others, to ſteal my Daughter from me to night ? abvv) 

Lod, Theſe two Rogues,upon my life I know*em not, you wn 
peak, 


Lond 


1053). 
ſpeaks, did 1 bireyou two to any.ſuch. Intents? Cr. did I ever change 


ord with you ? | Wn 
Peſ. Only once you ſaid you wou'd kick us two. Indeed Sir; it was 
not this Gentleman. Lod. Who was it, ſpeak Dogs ? 


Pie. O good Sir; It was Seignior Franciſco, the hurt Gentleman, that 
your. Worſhip talkt with ſo long. ; 

Gri. lamat my wits end, I confeſs this makes ſomething for ye, but 
ſill you are guilty, you ſtole her away, and have abuy'd her, 

Led. Ifthere be faith in man, ſhe's pure as Ice, the is my wife, Yr, 
married law and all the anger you let out is vented againlt your 
Daughters Husband, dear Sir, forgive us, we will make up this breach 
by future Obedience, which I will pay you as my on Father. 

Flo, Well, what wou'd you have more ? 

Gri, Well, if you. are married,'tisto late too recal it, you may £0 to- 
gether, but you get not a groat of me, . 

Enter Franciſco, led in by two Servants, 

Otr, However let's have your bleſſing. 

Gri, No, I le keep both for them that , BOY deſerve it, 

Flo, Curſe us then, that we may proſper cne way or other. 

Fra, 'Here,here, Grimani, vent all your fury here,'tis I am only guil- 
ty and deſerve the highelt of your rigour,thoſe jnnocentSouls have ever, 
trod the ſteps of Noble honour. I, only I, have ſtain'd my blood with 
baſeneſs.and been the cauſe of all the late Diſtractions. 

Gri, Well, well, you ſhall be hang'd however, and thoſe two Raſ- 
cals ſhall hang 'too for Company. 

Fra, Diſpoſe me as you pleaſe, my wounds I hope will ſave me from 
ſo great a ſhame, I think I ſhall dye, but muſt firſt ask pardon, Madam, 
of you, can you forgive a man ſo baſe,yet one that's truly penicent, 

Orr, 'Ican, #nddo, be Noble, Ile call youſriend, 

Fra. You are too good, now gallant Lodovico,which way mult I ads 
dreſs my ſelf to you, that have abus'd you both as Friend and Enemy, 
you have conquered me both with your Sword aad honour, if you have 
ſo much goodneſs to pardon me, [ ſhalldye happy, or elſe miſerable. 

Lod. 1 will notdoubt, Franciſco, your Repentance, if you be vertu- 
ous, you may find me in the ſe!f-ſame friendſhip, I had for you, when - 
thought you ſo. Fra. Now I am truly happy. 

Gri, I am ſtrangely mov'd, /cou'd almoſt find in my heart to forgive 
them, 

Flo, Faith try if it be poſſible, 4o one good AR before you dye. 

Fra, Seignior Griman,however you diſpoſe of me,l make it now wy 
laſt and dying requeſt,you wou'd forgive youPoblc Son & Daughter. 

Lod. I beg it on my knees, which never oop'd before to any for a 
pardon. 

Otr. Dear Sir, forgive us, - Flo. Don't Uncle, 


G rs, 


WO; 


wor IS. 
Y o A 


L LE 
ET & 


#f 7do, it ſhall be to vex thee, 4b.” Tjoyn my prayers 
; And 7 mine. © Gia, Te not ſtick out neither coed Maſt 


£3 wo #2 4 

- . 0 on 4 F- 
Z £4 3 yy 
2, LT 


© 
= * 


et... 


& 


Flo.Why then Tle vex youtill you defire that I wou'd give you leave 
to forgive me. cath - 

Grs, Nay, like enough, thou art a fury. 

Led. You are a Father now indeed, 

Alb. I hope Uncle you include me too and your Neece forall this, 
in the General AQ of Grace, | 

Gri, Why ſhe then and you have been atit'too ? 

Gia, 1, Maſter, they will all, 

Flo, At my Colins entreaty to keep her Company. 

Gri. Well / forgive you too, and will give you ſomething wortif 
thanks, ſome at peeſrnt, more when you are a Mother, 

Alb. That will be within three quarters of a year. 

Flo, Lord, Lord,are we all friends ? why then the Town's our own. 


Gri. Look it be, you Watch, take theſe peopleto the priſon, will - 


take Order they be ſeverely puniſhed. 

# Lod. Nay, noble Sir, {ince you have pardoned us, do'not mix harſh- 
neſs with your Clemency,for-my-ſake pardon Franciſce,be will be your 
bondman he ſhall ſerve you Nobly. | | iD 

Grs. Eg your ſake then / remit him, the reſt ſhall not ſtretch for it 
neither, only Conſtable ſee they be well diſciplin'd. penn hey 

Fra. You bind me to you ever. ; 

Gri, Come all home, along with me, Franciſco's wounds ſhall there 
be dreſt, / hope he will recover, we'l baniſh all our troubles from gur 
hearts, and Celebrate with joy theſe unlook't for Nuptials. 

-Cume, Son, and Nephew, all jealous thoughts are flown, 
.nd you mult ſtand the tryal of your own. 


= 
Iz 
: bl 
& 
[4 , 
= 


-- M7 
» ,<C Hb © &= 
1 9 OY, 
SE 
- 


Lee. 


'Grs, You have or'come my anger: Ido forgive, but notyou, Hufly;'
