Requested Title: HE GAMESTER
Authors: James Shirley
Matched Alias: The Gamester
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: gamesterasitwasp00shir
Source Title: The gamester : as it was presented by Her Majesties Servants at the private house in Drury-Lane
Source Author: Shirley, James, 1596-1666
Source Date: 1637
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/gamester_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from validated standalone Internet Archive searchtext with a clean title page and opening scene.

---
THE
GAMESTER.
'   v   is
IT  WAS  PRESEN-
ted  by  her  Ma)e flies  Servants
Ac  the  private  Houle  in
.   Drury  Lane.
LONDO
Printed  by  I   o   h   n   Norton,
Crooke,  and  William
Co  O   K   E.I637.
'   H   •   ■>-
Written.
By  I   A   M   E   S   S   H   I   R   L   Y.
THE
GAMESTER.
<$y£&US.  I.
Enter  MaflerW'ddingy  and  Miftris  Penelope,
lid.  What  neede  yea  be  fo  coy  now  l Ten.  Pray  colled:
Your  felfe  ,   remember  what  you  are, and  whofe« Y ou  have  a   vertuous  gentle  woman,  thinks Upon  your  faith  to  her.
Wi.  Thinke  of  a   Fiddle-fticke.
While  you  put  me  in  minde  of  what  I   am.
You  quite  forget  your  felfe  :   my  wife  I   allow Your  kinfwoman  farre  off,  to  whom  a   widdow  ,
Your  father  left  you,  withahandfome  fortune.
Which  by  her  marriage,  I   have  in  pofleffiom And  you  too ;   therefore  as  you  hope  to  be In  due  time  worth  a   husband  ,   thinke  upon’C  :
I   can  deferve  refped,  then  wifely  ufe  me.
As  you  would  keepe  me.
Pene.  This  is  but  atriall
Of  my  ttrength,  for  I   know  you  have  more  charity,
(Should  I   confent)then  Ship-wracke  your  owne  honor.
But  take  heede  fir,  how  you  proceede  to  jeft With  frailty,  leafftoo  much  difordering
A   z   Your
The  Gmefttr.
Your  good  thoughts ,   you  forget  and  by  degrees,
Loofe  your  owne  innocence.
Wil  jcft  l   you* Id  have  me  fweare,  and  yet  you  fliould  net thinke  it  fucji  a   wonder :   to  love:  come,  fliake  off  this  froft,  it ippiles  thee  •   ypur  nature  fliould  be  loft,  and  flexible;  perhaps thou  thinkft,  1   doc  not  love  thee  hardly,  I   know  not  how  to give  thee  better,  teflimony  ,   then  by  offering  my  fclfeto  thee, if  my  wife  die,  astennto  one  ihee’s  not  immortal  1,  we  may couple  tother  way.  #
‘ Teyie .   What  argument  is  this  to  affure  the  truth  of  your  a   £• fcdlion  to  me,  that  breake  your  v owes  to  her  ?
Wi  Oh  /   great  argument,  and  you  obferve  t.fhe  was  a   win- dow when  I   married  her  ,   thou  art  a   yong  maide  ,   and handfome. '
cPene. Can  you  be  fo  ingratefull,  to  punifh  whom  you  fliould reward,  remember  fir,  (bee  brought  you  that  wealth  you  have. 14
tooke  you  from  nothing  
Wi.  Ther’s  regfon  then  fcfor  nothing  I   fliould  love  her :   hang her  eflate  ,   I   was  bold  a   proper  man,  and  in  that  point ,   de» ferv’dher,  and  fhee  had  millions :   and  I   were  free  againe ,   I would,  not  draw  i' th  teame  of  marriage  for  ten  fubfidyes, not  to  command  a   Province.
PeneXeX  you  faid,  were  your  wife  dead  you’d  marry  me. Wi.  Onely  thee,  and  nobodyelfe.
Pene*  Twere  dangerous  to  have  many.
Wi.  To  hav.e  one,  is  little  leffe  then  madnes  y   conic ,   wo't prornife  ?   Enter  Afiftris  Wilding. *   <
Pene. What  ?   wl. A   courfe,  you  know  my  meaning,
Mi.\  doe  not  like  this  whifpering,  why  with  her So  clofe  in  parly  ?
,   ^.WcYthoudoethisfeateforme?
"   Pis  fini  Ih’d  in  a   paire  of  minut  s*
Ecnei Yes,  upon  one  condition.
Wi  .What  condition  ?
Pe. That  your  wife  give  confent,you  fliali  then  command  me- f’Pi.V le  undertake  to  goe  a   pilgrimage To  Ierufalem ,   and  returne  fooner :   wood I   did  not  love  thee, love  thee  infinitely.
That’s  all  j   ’twonot  doc— My  wife,  I   hope*  Exit  Pene,
Shee
7   he  Gamtflerk
Sbee  has  not  cavT-dropd:us ;   what  pitty  tis She  cannot  finde  the  way  to  Heav en  ;   1   fhould  not Trouble  her  in  hart/thefe  wives  will  have  no  confidence,  - Butfticketouseverlaftingly.  Now  Lady,
How  did  your  monkey  reft  la  ft  night,  youlooke As  you  had  not  done  your  prayers  yet, I   woriot  difturbe  you.
Mi. Pray  fir  ftay,  let  me  but  know Some  reafion  why you  ufcme  thus  unkindly  ?
#   If  I   have  beene  gilty  of  offence,  I   am  not
Part  hope ,   but  with  the  knowledge  of  my  error,
’Tis  pofiible  I   may  amend,  and  pleafe  you.
Wi.  I   doe  not  like  you.  Mi.  You  did  marrie  me.
JT/,Yes,  I   did  marrie  you,  her’s  too  much  record  fior’f ,
I   would  there  were  a   Par  fun  to  un marry  us ,
If  any  of  our  Clergiehad  that  faculty,
He  might  repaire  the  old,  and  build  as  many New  Abbey es through  the  Kingdome  in  a   tweluemonth. Shall  I   fpeake  truth  ?   I   never  much  affededthee,
X   married  thee  for  thy  foules  lake,  not  thy  body ,
And  fhall  asfoone  get  children  on’t :   and  yet I   doe  not  hate  thee,  witneffe,  I   dare  kilTe,
Hold  thee  by  the  hand, and  lleepe  in  the  fame  houle,
And  in  thy  bed  fometimes,  fomething  ha’s  beene  done.
Mi. Within  thememorie  of  man,  but — •
What  fir  ?
wi  You  have  afcurvy  quality  wife, I   told  you  on’t, cJ^fiLOnce  more,  ana  Tie  corred  it.
^/.You  are  given  to  be  jealous,  I   cannot Ramble  abroad  in  gentlemens  company Whole  dayes,  3y  out  a   nights, but  you  fufped I   am  wanton,  ’tls  ill  done,  it  becomes  no  modeft Woman:  that  love  slier  husband, to  be  jealous,
Whate’re  fhefee,  orheares,  mend*  mend  this  fault. You  doenot  know,how  it  may.  worke  upon  me.
Some  wife  will  bid  her  husbands  leverets  welcome, Keepe  houfe  together,  and  provide  cleane  fheets, Andcullices  to  fortifie  ;   you  neere  did  it :
Know  her  owne  Chamber  and  not  come  forth Till  ilie  be  lent  for  •   if  her"  husband  kiffe  her, .
A   3.
Some-
7 he  Gamefter.
Sometimes,  allow  her  clothes  and  other  trinkets,
Suffer  her  carve  at  Table,  fhe  is  {atisfied,
And  none  o’th  parifh  talke,  fhe  carries  it So  handfomlie :   thefe  moralls  I   have  read Before  now,  but  you  put  them  not  inpra&ife.
Nor  for  ought  I   perceive,  have  difpofition  took Therefore  i   letake  my  courie.
Mi.  To  fhew  I   can
Be  obedient  to  my:griefes}from  this  time,  fir,
I   wonot  urge  with  one  unwelcome  fyilablc.
How  much  I   am  neglc&ed,  i3le  conceale  it Too  from  the  world, your  lhame  mutt  needs  be  mine.
I   fee  you  doe  not  love  me,  where  your  heart Hath  plac’d  a   worthier  thought,  let  it  dwell  ever3 freely  perfue  your  pkafores ,   I   will  have No  parfion  that  ihali  mucinie,  you  are.
And  fhail  be  Lord  of  me  (bill . wi.  I   like  this,  if  it  be  no  diiguiie.
Mi.  Do  notfufped:  me,
I   would  fweare  by  a   kiffe,if  you  vouchsafe  it.
You  ihall  not  keepe  a   fervant,that  ihall  be  more  humble, jvi.  And  obedient  to  my  will  ?   Mi, In  all  things,
J^.Bntifl  bring  home  a   miftreflfe?
A/i.riecall  her  fitter.
Wi.What  if  there  be  one Already,  that  does  pleafe  me,  will  you  not Repine,  andlooke  awry  upon’s,  when  we Make  much  of  one  another  ? yTILSo  you  will  but  lometimes  fmilcon  me  tootle  indeavour* W.Well  faid,this  may  doe  good  upon  me,  aj I   finde  you  prompt  in  this,  I   may  coniider Other  matters:  to  tell  you  true,  I   love Your  kinfwoman.  Mi.  How  ?
JVi.Yth  way  you  wot  on,  but I   finde  her  cold  and  peevith,how  fhemaic Be  brought  about  I   know  not,  Ywoold  fhew  weib And  be  a   preiident  for  other  wives.
If  you  would  put  your  helpe  took  ^
Mi-  Goodnesblefleme.
The  Gameflcr,
ivl.  One  woman  with  another  can  doc  more In  fuch  a   caufc,  thentwentic  men.  I   doc  not Wander, you  fee  ,out  of  the  blood,  this  will Be  away  to  juftifie  your  obedience.
Mi. You  fhew  a   tyrant  now,  and  Bead  of  framing  ^
My  foule  to  patience, murder  both.  E xt>t •
Wl.l  have  gone  too  farre  a   confciencc  ;   this  may Spoile  all, and  now  I   thinkc  upont,  I   was A   coxcombe  to  difeover  any  party,
I   mull  deny ’t  againe,  and  carry  things  (
More  clofelie. How  now  Will  ?   Eater  hazard.
Ha. How  now  Will  ?   *s  that  all  ?
Looke  up, and  aske  me  a   queftion  like  a   man,
What  melancholy  ?   Wl.  No,  no  ;   a   toy, a   trifie.
Ha.Thix.  liould  be  a   woman,  who’ll  thou  art  thinking  on  ?
I   have  beene  of  yourcounfclh
wl.l  was  thinking,  o’  my  Wife — >
^   Ha.  I   met  her  fadd.
Wl.l  cannot  blame  her;
We  have  hadadialogue^com^thouknow’ftmy  bofome, #rf.when  do’ll:  mcane  to  lie  with  her  ?
Wl.l  know  no;,butl have  offer’d  faire  conditions  :
Shee  is  very  confident ,   I   doe  not  dote  *
Upon  her  beauty',  I   have  told  her,  firra,  *
1   love  her  kinfwoman.  Ha.  Y’are  not  fo  mad.
Wl. The  worlds  deceav’d  in  her,{heele  give  me  leave,
To  ramble  where  /   lift,  and  feedc  upon What  bell  delights  my  appetite.
Ha.Hc that  has
An  ambition  to  be  ftrangled  in  his  fieepc.
May  tell  his  wife  he  loves  another  woman.
Wl. But  I   was  not  content  with  this,  becauG The  other  wench  was  fomewhat  obftinate,
I   muft  needs  urge  my  wife,  to  mollifie And  mold  her, for  my  purpofe,  Ha.  And  lie  confented  too  ?
Wl.  No 't would  not  doe.
This  went  againft  her  ftomacke  and  we  parted .   - ^G.Next  time  you  fee  her, looke  to  be  prefented With  your  miftrefles  note  for  this^do’ft  thinke  a   woman
Can
7 be  Gfinrejlfr.
Can  be  fo  patient,  to  know  her  riv&ll I'th  fame  roofe ,   and  leave  her  eyes,  to  fee  thee Agen  ?   I   am  forry  for  thee, wl.  Iam  confident
Slice  dare  not :   but  for  all  that, would  I   had Beene  leffe  particular.
H*.Come,I  love  thee  well ,
But  not  thy  wit,  to  carry  things  no  handfomen You  mult  unravell  agen,  and  make  your  wife Beleeve  you  did  but  try  her.
How  now , what’s  the  newes  here  ?
Enin'  Officers  with  Delamore  wounded,
1   0/. Quickly  to  a   Surgeon, beare  him  gently.
P'ti.  W   ha  t   ’   s   the  bufine  fie.
2   ^.Nothing, fir, but  a   gentleman  is  kild,and  we  are Carrying  him  to  a   Surgeon.
WifT is  J acke  ‘Delamorejno,  is  not  dead.  Tta.Whp  hurt  him  ? /^.Matter  Beamont ;   we  cannot  flay,  fir,
W\.  Why  they  were  friends.
2   Off*  But  wine  made  them  fall  outcome  fay,  about Their  N'iftreffes.
IVl  I   did  expedl  a   woman  at  one  end  on’t.
What  miferable  fooles  are  men,  to  kill One  another  forthefe  Cockatrices/
E'aA  am  forry  for  poore  Beamont .
Wi.lt  would  be  long  ere  any  miftreffc  would Be  fo  defperate  for  her  fervant,  this  is  valur.
High  and  mighty  valor.
Ea.  Menmuft  preferve
Their  honors  man, thou  doft  not  know  their  quarrel  1   ?
Wh Thou  art  held  a   peece  of  a   kil  1-Cow  too,  looke  tooT before  the  felfions  take  an  order  w’ee  :   i   ft  net  a   great  deale  fa- fer,  now  to  skermifhwith  a   Peticote  ,   and  touze  ahandfome wench  in  private ;   then  be  valiant  in  the  ftreets ,   and  kiffe  the Gallowes  for’t  ?   hang  ,   hang  this  foolerie  ,   let  gentlemen rather  live,  and  pay  their  Tailors ,   then  let  their  clothes  en- rich the  hangmans  wardrobe.
/f^.But  skermifhing  as  you  call  it,with  the  Peticote,
Js  by  fome,held  away  to  this  preferment,
The  Gamcfter .
Your  wcnchcs  ha  beene  (ticklers ,   and  Tome  men Dropt  in  their  quarrell .   fV*. Let  them  be  fuch  coxcombs They  cannot  die  too  (bone  ;   cannot  Ihave A   Lady  of  pleafurc ,   but  to  pleafeher  humour,
I   muft  be  engag’d  to  fight  ana  kill  men  for  her  ?
Becaufe  her  healths  refus’d ,   anothers  n   ofe Or  teeth  preferrd,  fubftantiall  grounds  for  murder.
We  fpend  our  blood  too  much  another  way ;
Confumption  take  me,  if  I   fight  for  one  on  ’em,
I   will  drinke  Angle  beere  firft ,   and  live  honed.
Gentlemen  are  come  to  a   fine  pafie,  doe  not  you Thmkebuttispofiible,  I   may  fight  for  all  this?
Ha. There  maybe  caufes ,   that  have  women  in’ em.
But  I   confetfe,  no  polecats,  or  lewd  ftrumpets,
Though  I   doe  ufe  the  tricke  o’th  fieili,  (hall  drive Me  to  the  Surgeon  j   I   had  a   mother.
JT/.And  I   have  a   wife ,   would  thou  had’ ft  her.
Ha,  No,No,ihc  is  well  as  fhee  is.
There  may  be  honor  to  defend  thefe.  ^.Sometimes,
H^.But  ther’s  a   mifehiefe  greater  then  all  thefe A   bafe  and  forded  provocation,
Ufd  among  gentlemen,  they  cannot  quarrell About  a   glaffe  of  Wine  >.  but  out  fiies  ftreigth Sonne  ofa  whore,  dead  mothers  muft  be  torne.
Out  of  their  graves,  or  living,  have  their  names Poyfoncd  by  a   prodigious  breath  :   it  were A   brave  and  noble  Law ,   to  make  this  tongue B   e   cut  for’t,  it  wod  fave  much  blood  ith  yeere, ,
That  might  be  fpent  more  honerablie.
TV\ .   T   he  lie  grew  a   dul  1   provocation,  this  has  quickn’d  ns, but  leave  this  common  place,thou  canfl:  not  helpe  it,  letts  talke of  fomething  elfe.  Stay  is  not  this  Beaumont  ?
Enter  Beaumont ,   and  Officers . i^z.Apprehended,alas  poore  gentleman  •   how  now  Ned  l Tea.  As  you  fee  gentlemen,  cald  to  my  account,  - wl.  We  heard  a   pecce  of  the  misfortune ,   but Be  not  deje&ed,  he  may  live.
S^.Ifeareit.  .
Pray  lead  n\p  where  you  pleale,  alas.  Violamc  /   this  newes  will
B   wound
The  Gamjler  *
wound  thee  too.  Exit*
jri.l’lc  with  him ,   and  know  the  ftory.
Ha.  Twill  but  trouble  me  ;
I   can  doe  him  no  fervice,  beftde  that,
I   am  engag’d  to  meete  old  Matter  ‘Barnacle.
Enter  Acre-lefle^  Little-flock?,  and  SelLaway Whither,  whither  Gentlemen, with  your  fvvords  arawne  ?
Acr.  Dostt  not  fee  a   gentleman  led  to  Prifon  ?
Wee'le  reskuehim  from  the  Offcers,  come  joyne  with  us W e   fhall  draw  more  to  the  caufe.
Ha.  You  doe  not  meane
this  rafhnes ;   hide  your  fwords,be  advif  d   better ;
P5ee  know  his  faett  ?   Lit .   He  has  flainc  a   gentleman.
Sel. They  fay  he  is  not  dead, the  wTounds  not  mortalL Ha. And  will  you  make  one  paft  cure  ? e^r.How  do5 It  meane  ?
Ha.  Upon  your  felves,c©ole  your  hot  bloods  a   little No  mutuny  my  countrymen,  remember,
If  he  recover  that  is  hurt ,   the  tother
Will  come  off  well  enough  ,   without  your  volour  s.
Breath  ,   breath.a  while,,  you  may  ifyou  have  a   minde  eoo's- Jnftead  of  reskuing,  betray  a   gentleman ^
And  your  felves  too, to  a   danger.  Lit.  He  laves  right,
AWTisfcurvcy  wearing  hempe,  ifyou  fcape  Riling,
There  be  more  butchers  then  fell  fleih  •   and  Citizens Have  no  mercy  in  their  Clubs,  efpecially When  gentlemen  have  fo  litle  wit ,   to  bring There  heads  toth  knocking  downe,  tis  a   revenge They  owe  you  for  their  wives ,   oh  take  heede  mainely Oftnefe  left  handed  Halberdiers  Acr.  Confound  'em, H^.How  many  will  you  kill  with  your  bird-fpit  ?
You  have  more  leggs  and  armes  at  home,  which  makes You  valiant,  iienot  pare  my  nailesto  day,
And  yet  I   love  my  friend,  as  the  beft  on  you;
You  know  I   dare  fight  too,  but  in  this  caufe You  mutt  needs  pardon  me,  I   belecvc  the  ftouteft That  now  would  feeme  all  fire ,   and  fword,  will  gcc Withas  ill  will  to  hanging,  as  another,
willbecom’tas  fcurvily,  take  your  courfes.
Set.
The  Gamefter,
Sel.  I   thiake  *tis  better :
Efo.O’th  two,to  go  to  the  Taveme,  and  be  driihke In  your  owne  defence,  a   wench  is  not  fo  dangerous Nor  the  Difeafe  that  Waites  upon  her.
Acr.  What  if  the  gentleman  that’s  hurt  fhould  die  ? Thenther’s  no  hope  for  tothcr.
^.Leffe  for  you.
You  would  be  guilty  of  his  murther  too.
And  fetch  him  from  the  Law,  why  you  may  doo’t : Tispi.y  but  the  government  fhould  thanke  you,  - And  if  you  fcape  the  halter  for’t ,   it  may  be Another  man  in  time,  may  cut  your  throatc,
And  ther’s  one  for  another ,   paid  in  the  bloods Come  be  your  felves ,   thefe  are  not  a<5b  of  gentlemen, Where  fhamemot  honor  muft  reward  your  daring. Though  we  be  wild,  it  followesnot  we  fhould Be  mad  out-right.  Lit .1  was  ever  of  his  minde*
e^r.Come  lett'sto  Tavcrne.
Hal  am  for  that  coaft,  now  ;I  thinke  upon’t riemeeteyou  at  the  new  randevow  within This  halfe-houre  ,   1   expe<5l  a   gentleman That  has  engaged  my  promife  ;   iie  come  fee Ere  you  be  ha lfe  dranke.  Sel.  Doenotfaile.
Ha. Drinke  Sack  and  thinke  not  on't,what  fliould  be The  bufines  that  old  Barnacle  has  defired My  conference  ?   5tis  not  to  lend  me  money  fure,
Hee’s  here.
Enter  M after  Barnacle.
Bar. Matter  Hazard.  Ha. I   was  comming  to  you,fir . 'Bar. I   am  fortunate  to  prevent  fo  great  a   trouble. There  is  a   bufines,fir, where  in  I   muft  defire  your  favour. Hka.  Mine  ?   command  it,fir.
2?<*r.Nay  i*le  be  thankefull  too,  I   know  you  arc A   gentleman.
Ha .   That  fliould  incline, y ou  thinke I   am  not  mercenarie.
Ba.  I   befeech  you,  fir,
Miftake  me  not,  rewards  are  due  to  vermes,
)   And  honor  muft  bccherifh*d.
B   %
The  Gmefttr .
Ba.  What’s  your  purpofe?  ^
Prayoleere  my  underftanding.
‘S^.Toi^e-plaiuc,  fir,  1
You  have  a   name  i’th  Towne  for  a   brave  fellow.
Ha. How,  fir,  you  doe  not  come  to  jeere  me  ?
*Ba.  Patience,  1   meane  you  have  the  opinion Of  a   valiant  genleman ,   one  that  dares Tight  and  maintain?  your  honor  againft  odds.
The  fword-men  doe  acknowledge  you,  the  ibaylies Obferve  their  di fiance,  all  the  fwaggering  puffes Strike  their  top-feiles,  I   have  heard  'em  in  the  fireets Saiether.e  goes  daring  Hazard ,   a   man  careleffe'
Of  wounds ,   and  though  he  have  not  had  the  lucke
To  kill  fo  many  as  another,  dares
fight  with  all  themthat  have.  ^.You  have  heard  this.
Ba .   And  more,  and  more,  miftake  not.
1   do  not  all  this  while  acompt  you  in The  lifi  of  thofe  are  cald  the  blades,that  roare In  brothells ,   and  breake  windowes, fright  the  fireets At  mid-ni  ght  worfe  then  Conftables,  and-  fometimes Set  upon  innocent  Bell-men,  to  beget Difcourfe  for  a   weekes  dyet  ,   that  fweare,  dammes. To  pay  their  debts,and  march  like  walking  armories. With  Poyniard5Piftoll,Rapier,-and Batoone,
As  they  would  murder  aril  the  Kings  leige  people.
And  blow  downe  fireets  ;   no-I  repute  you  valiant . Jndeede,and  honor  d, and  come  now  without More  ceremony,  to  defire  your  favour  ;
Which  as  you  are  a   gentleman, I   hope,
Youfie  not  denie  me;
Ha.  Though  your  Language Be  joinething  ftrange ,   yet,  bcaufe  I   thinke  you  dare  not  - Intend  me  anabufe,  I   wonot  queftionit.
Pray  to  the  point,  I   do  not  thinke,your  come To  have  me  be  your  fecond,
^   Bar  I   am  no  fighter,
Though  I   have  feene  a   fence-lchoolein  my  Dayes,
And  crackt  a   Cudgell ,   yeti  come  about A   fighting  bufmefl>.
The  Gamefler.
Ha.Y ou  would  have  me  beate  feme  body  for  you-
'Zfor.Not  fo  noble  Hazard,  yet I   come  to  entreat  a   valiant  curtefie ,
Which  I   am  willing  to  requit  in  money,
I   have  brought  gold  to  give  you  paiment,fir,
Tis  a   thing  you  may  eafily  confent  to,
And  ’twill  oblige  me  ever.  Ha.  Be  particular.
Bar. Then  thus  you  are  not  ignorant  I   have  a   Nephew,  fir,
Ha.  You  have  fo.
Bar .   One  that’.s  like To  be  my  heire ,   the  onely  of  my  name That’s  left ,   and  one  that  may  in  time  be  made Aprettie  fellow.  Ha .   Very  well,  proceede.
BaXm  know  or  you  imagine ,   that!  have A   pretty  eftate  too.
Ha.  Y’are  held  a   maine  rich  man,  fir.
In  money  able  to  weigh  downe  an  Alderman.
Ba. I   have  more  then  I   ihall  fpend ;   now  I   come  clofe,
I   would  have  this  Nephew  ofmine,converfe  with  geptlemen.'
Ha.  And  hee  does  fo.  v
Ba. I’le  not  pinch  him  in’s  allowance,
The  Univerfity  had  almoft  fpoild  him.  Ha.  W ith  what  ?
Ba.  With  mode  By.  a   thing  you  know Not  here  in  fafhion ,   but  that’s  almoft  cur’d,
I   would  allow  him  to  be  drunke*.
Ha.  You  may,  fir*
Ba. Or  any  thing  to  fpeake  him  a   fine  gentleman,,.
H^.With  your  favour, fir, let  me  be  bold  a   litle To  interrupt  you,  were  not  you  a   Citizen  ?
Ba.  Tis  confeft,fir.
Ha.  It  being  a   thriving  way h   walke wherein  you  might  direft 'your Nephew,-.
Why  d’ee  not  breede  him  fo  ?
Ba.  I   apprehend  ;
And  thus  I   fatisfie  you ,   we  that  had Our  breeding  from.a  Trade,  cits  as  you  call  us,
Though  we  hate  gentlemen  our  felves ,   yet  are Ambitious  ,   to  make  all  our  children  gentlemen,
!n  three  generations  they  retume  agen,
B   5
We
7 he  Gamefter.
We  for  our  children  purchafe  Land,  they  brave  it Fth  Countrie,  beget  children,  and  they  fell.
Grow  poore,  and  fend  their  fonnes  up  to  be  Prentifes :
There  is  a   whirle  in  fete  ,   the  Courtiers  make Us  cuckolds ;   marke,we  wriggle  into  their Eftates,  poverty  makes  their  children  Citizens  ;
Our  Tonnes  cuckold  them,  a   circular  juftice.
The  Wv>rld  tumes  round, but  once  more  to  the  purpofc.
Ha.  To  your  Nephew.
7?^. This  Nephew  of  mine,  Ido  love  deerly;
He  is  all  my  care,  I   would  be  loth  to  loofe  him.
And  to  preferve  him  both  in  life, and  honor  .*
I   come  to  you.  /A*  .Now  you  come  to  me  indeede,fir.
A^/VVhat  fhall  I   give  you,fir,to  let  him    
/Ar.What  ?   Bar.  Pray  be  not  angry.
Ha. By  no  meanes.
'Bar. There  is  no  luch  fecurity  i’th  World,
Tie  pay  for’t  heartily.
Ha. For  what  ?   ^.What  fhall  I   give  you  troth^md  let  him.
iA*.What  ?   2?^.Bcate  you,  hr  ?
Jlcr.  How  ?
2?^.Nay  do  not,fir,miftake  me,  for  although I   name  it  courfely,  I   defire  it  ihouldbe With  your  confent,  no  otherwife  •   my  Nephew Is  raw, and  wants  opinion ,   and  the  talke Of  fuch  a   thing ,   to  beate  a   gentleman.
That  all  the  Townes  afraid  of,  would  bee  worth In’s  credit, heaven  knowes  what,  alas  you  cannot Blame  a   kinde  Uncle,  to  dcfireall  meanes To  get  his  Nephew  fame,  and  keepe  him  fefe,
And  this  were  fuch  a   way.  Ha,  T o   have  me  beaten;
Ba,  Y’are  i’th  right,  but  doc  not  mifconccive  me,
Under  your  favour, my  intention  is  not He  fhould  much  hurt  you,  if  you  pleafe  to  let  him " Quarrell, or  To  at  Tavcrne,or  where  elfe You  fihall  thinke  fit ,   and  throw  a   pottle* pot — •
Ha,  At  my  head.
Ba. Yes,  or  (ay  it  be  a   quart,  dill  under  your  com  ft  ion,  ,
Onely  that  fome  of  your  acquaintance  and
Gentlemen
The  Gamejler.
Gentlemen  may  take  notice  ,   that  he  dares Affront  yj>u,  and  come  oft' with  honor  bandfomelie, Lookeher’s  a   hundred  pecces  ,   tell  ’em  i’th  Ordinarfe Th’are  weight  upon  my  credit ,   play  ’em  not Againft  light  gold,  this  is  die  Pro^oguc  to My  tlianks,  befide  my  Nephew  fhall  in  private Acknowledge  himfelfe  beholding,
Ha.A  hundred  pecces  / 1   want  mony .   Bar.  Right.,
Ha.  You  give  me  this  to  let  your  Nephew  beate  me. Bar.Vvay  take  me  w’ee,  Ido  notmeane  he  fhould  —
By  beating ,   huit  you  dangerouflie,  you  may Contrive  the  quarrell  ,   fo  that  he  may  draw Some  blood,or  knocke  you,  o' re  the  pate^nd  fo  forth  ,
And  come  offbravelie  ,   this  is  all.
Ha.Wcll,  fir.
You  doc  not  meane ,   you  fay  heeiliould  endanger My  life  or  limbes ;   all  you  defirc ,   if  I Mi  (lake  not,  is  to  get  your  Nephew  credit.
That  being  fiefh’d,  he  may  walkc  fecurelieymd  be  held  — Valiant  by  gayning  honor  upon  mee.
^r.Youunderftand  me  right.
Ha.Vlc  put  it  up.
Pray  fend  your  Nephew  to  me,  weele  agree.
Bar.  Agree,  fir  ?   you  muft  quarrell ,   and  he  mutt  beate  you, elfe,tis  no  bargaine.
^.Not  before
We  have  concluded  how  things  (Rail  bee  carried.
'Ba.l  muft  defire  your  fectefie  and — - —
Ha.Hecv’s  my  hand.  Bar.  Andther’smy  monk\.
Ha. Your  Nephew  fhall  be  a   blade.
2^.Why  ther’s  ten  peeces  more,caufe  you  come  off So  freely,  i*le  fend  him  to  you;
Ha.Do  fo, why  this,  if  the  Dice  favour  me  may  bring  all My  Lands  agen,  befure  you  fend  him,  but No  words  for  your  Nephews  credit.
Ba. Mum — -   I   thanke  you  heartilie.  Exit.
Ha.Bc  there  fuch  things  i’th  World,i’Ie  firft  to  the  Tavernc, There  I   am  ftaid  for ,   gentlemen  I   come,
Tie  be  beate  every  day  for  fuch  a   fumme,  Em.
the  Gamtfter,
Aft.  I   L
Enter  Miftreffe  Wilding  ,   and  the  Page.
.Afi.Wher’s  your  Matter  ,   boy  ?
Pag. I   know  not  Miftreife.
Mi.Comz  neerer,firra,you  are  of  yonr  Matters Counfell  fometimes,come,  be  true  in  what I   ttiall  defire ,   and  I   fhall  finde  a   time,  for  your  reward.
Ea.  How  d’ee  meane  Mittreffe?
We  Pages  meete  rewards  of  feverall  natures.
This  great  man  gives  us  Gold^hat  Ladie  Gloves,
Tother  filke  Stockins,  Rofes,  Garters;  but
The  Ladie ,   and  Miftretfe  whom  we  ferve  in  ordinarie,
Referves  another  bountie,  for  our  clofenefle.
MiX  fee  you  can  be  a   wag,  but  be  jutt  to  me,  and  fecret. Pa.  As  your  Phyfition,or  your  looking-Iafbe That  in  your  abfence  cannot  be  corrupted Tobetraie  your  complexion.
MU What  private  miftreffes,  does  Matter  Wilding  vifitr P^.Who  my  Matter  ?
Alas  foriooth,  d’eethinke  he  lets  me  know  ?
J^/.Nay,  nay.'diffcmblenot.
Pa.  I   hire  a   Coach
Sometimes,  or  fio,-  but  ride  alwaies  i’th-boote,
I   looke  at  no  bodie  but  the  pafiengers,
I   do  not  fit  i’th  fame  box  at  Playes  with  him,
I   waite  at  Taveme,  I   confeflfe,  and  fo  forth,
And  when  he  has  fup’d,we?muft  have  time  to  eate  too,
And  what  fhould  I   trouble  my  confidence.
With  being  too  officious,  till  I   am  caldfor  ?
Tis  true,  he  waites  upon  the  Ladies  home.
But  tis  fio  darke,  I   know  not  where  they  dwell,
Arid  the  next  day  we  have  new  ones,  las  meere  Grangers Tome,  and  I   fhould  be  unmannerlie To  Catcchifie  ’em,  if  now, and  then, there  be Any  iiiperfiuouscaft  waiting- woman.
There  be  fio  many  iervingmen  about  her.
The  Gamefier.
I   cannot  come  to  aske  a   queftion.
And  how  fhould  I   know  any  thing  ?
Mi. I   fee  you  are  old  enough  for  vice^
/VAlas  forfooth,
You  know  tis  ill  to  doe  a   thing  that's  wicked.
But  ’twere  a   double  finne  to  talke  on  t   too,
If-  I   were  guiltie  ;   behde  forfooth,  I   know Youwouldneeretruftmeagen,  if  /fhould  tell  you. cJWThou  art  deceav'djit  (hall  endeare  thee  more.
T a X   muft  befeech  you To  be  excuf’d,tny  Matter  is  my  Matter,
My  feete  are  at  your  fervice ,   not  my  tongue,
Iwo’dnot  forfet  my  recognizance.
And  fhame  the  tribe, Pages,  and  Mid-wives  are Swometobeclofe.
Mi.  Hence  thou  old  in  vilanie.
But  ’tis  in  vaine  to  chide,  leave  me ,   and  bid Mittris  Penelope  come  hither.  Pa. Yes  forfooth.
Mil  know  not  which  way  to  beginne,  to  me Hee  has  betraid  he  loves  her ,   ftie  is  prefent.
Enter  Penelope.
P^.Willyoubefadftill  Cozen,why  d’?e  greeve?
Be  kinder  to  your  felfe,  truftme,  Iweepe  ~
When  I   am  alone, for  you.
Mi  Sorrow  and  I
Are  taking  leave  I   hope,  and  thefe  are  onely  ^
Some  drops  after  the  cloud  has  wept  his  violence:
Were  one  thing  finifli’d, I   fhould  nere  be  fad  more,
And  I   cannot  defpaire  to  know  it  done,
Since  the  effed  depends  upon  your  love.
PeneMy  love  ?   tis  juftice  you  command  my  fervice,
I   would  I   were  fo  happic.
Mi.  Make  me  fo,
By  your  confent  to  my  defire.  cPene.  Pray  name  it.
MU  onely  aske  your  love,  praie  give  it  me.
Pene. My  love  ?   why  doe  you  mocke  my  poore  hart,  which Poures  all  it  has  upon  you  ?   y’are  pofleft  of  that  alreadic.
Mi  You  examine  not
The  extent  of  my  requelt,  for  when  you  have
C
Given
The  Gamefter.
Given  what  I   aske,your  love,  you  muff  no  more Dired  it, as  you  pleafe,  the  power’s  in  me How  to  difpofe  it.
Pen.  And  you  {hall  for  ever,
I   have  no  paflion  that  fhali  not  know  obedience  to  you. Mu  Your  love  by  gift
Made  mine/  give  my  husband  you,  love  him.
Pene.l  alwaiesdid.
-Mi.  But  in  a   neerer  way  :
Love  him  as  I   doe, with  a   refolution To  give  your  felfe  to  him,  it  he  defire  i:.
Pene. I   underhand  you  not,  or  if  you  doe Sufocd  I   cherifhany  lawleflc  flame —
Mi. Thou  art  to  innocent  •   be  lefTe,  and  doe An  ad  to  endeare  us  both,  1   know  he  loves  thee  % Meete  it,deere  coofe,  Yis  all  I   beg  of  thee;
I   know  you  thinke  it  a   moft  ftrange  requeft.
But  it  will  make  fortunate.
Pene.  Greife  I   feare
Hath  made  her  wild ,   d’ec  know  what  you  defire  ?
Yes, that  you  love  my  husband :   modeftie Will  not  allow  me  to  dilcourfe  my  with In  everie  circumfknce ,   but  thinke  how  defperate My  wound  is, that  would  have  fo  ftrange  a   cure,
Hee’le  love  me  then, and  truft  me  i’le  not  ftudie Revenge,  as  other  wives  perhappes  would  doe,
But  thanke thee  ,   and  indeede  an  ad  like  this,
So  full  of  love,  with  fo  much  Ioffe  and  fhame  too,
Tor  mine  and  his  fake,  will  deferve  all  dutie,
Pene.  I   have  no  patience  to  heare  more,  and  could I   let  in  a   thought,  you  meant  this  earned:,
I   fhould  forget  I   knew  you ;   but  you  cannot Be  falne  from  fo  much  goodneffe ,   I   confeffe I   have  no  confidence  in  your  husbands  vertuew.
He  has  attempted  me  ;   but  fhali  hope  fooner To  leave  a   ftaine  upon  the  funne,  then  bribe Mee  to  fo  foule  a   guilt ;   I   have  no  life Without  my  innocence,  and  you  cannot  make Your  felfe  more  miferable ,   then  to  wilh  it  ffom  me :
The  Gamejier.
Oh,  do  not  loofe  the  merit  of  your  faith.
And  truth  to  him  ,   though  he  forget  himfelfe.
By  thinking  to  relee ve  your  felfe  thus  finful  lie.
But  fure  you  doe  but  trie  me  all  this  while.
Mi.  And  1   have  found  thee  pure, be  ftill  prefcrved But  he  will  ftragle  further — *
Tene.ChcxiCti  hope.
He  rather  will  come  backe  ;   your  teares,  and  prayers Cannot  be  loft.
Mi%  I   charge  thee  by  thy  love,
Yet  be  mid  by  me ;   i'le  not  be  fo  wicked To  tempt  thee  in  a   thought  fhall  blemifh  thee  :
But  as  thou  would’ft  defire  my  peace,  and  his ConveFfion,  if  his  wantonnes  la  ft  with  him,
Appeare  more  tradable,  allow  him  fo  much Favour ,   in  fmile,or  language, that  he  maie  not Thinke  it  impoflible  to  prevaile  at  laft.
Pw.This  may  ingage  him  further ,and  my  felfeto  a   difnonor. Mi.  It  fhall  worke  our  happineffe.
As  I   will  manage  things ;   ’tis  but  to  feemc :
A   looke  will  coft  thee  nothing,  nor  a   fyllable To  make  his  hopes  more  pleafing,  on  my  life Thou  fhaltbefafe  both  in  thy  fame,  and  perfon.
Will  you  doe  this  for  my  fake  ?
P^.riere&fe  no  danger,  if  I   fuffer  not  in  honor,
To  doe  you  any  ferv ice, have  caft  it
Already,  in  my  braine,  but  doe  not  yet Inquire  my  purpofe,  as  bis  follie  leades Him  to  purfue  you, let  me  know,  and  i’le By  faire  degrees  acquaint  you  with  my  plot,
Which  built  on  no  foule  ends,  is  like  to  profper.
And  fee  how  aptlie  he  prefents  himfelfe,
Preethee  feeme  kinde,  and  leave  the  reft  to  me.
He  fhall  not  fee  me.  Exit.
Enter  Mnfter  Wilding.
TVi. How  now  cooze  ?   was  that My  wife  went  off  ?   Tene.  Yes,  fir.
wl Let  her  goe,  what  laid  fhee  to  thee  ?
C   2
fpene.
The  G.mefler *
P^.Nothing.  wh Thou  art  troubled.
Pene%  Pray  to  your  knowledge, fir,  wherein  have  I Done  injury  to  you,  or  her  ?
TFi.Has  (he  abuf’d  thee  ?
He  goe  kicke  her.
Pene .By  no  meanes,fir,  I   fteale  away  your  hart.
And  meets  at  ftolne  embraces.
^’.Does  fhee  twit  thee?iTe  kicke  her  like  a   foot-ball. Say  but  the  word.-
Pcne.¥>y  no  meanes  thinke  upon’t,  I   have  forgiven  her, You  (hanot  fir,fo  much  asfrpwne  upon  her.
Pray  do  not  as  you  love  me,
Wee  may  ftudie  a   more  convenient  revenge.
Wl .   How’s  this  ?
I   preethee  if  fhe  have  beene  peremptorie,
Which  was  none  of  our  articles, let  me  inftruft  thee, How  we  fhall  be  reveng’d.
Pene .   Sir,  I   acknowledge Thegroth  and  expedition  of  my  fortune,
Is  in  your  love,  and  though  I   wod  not  wrong  her ;
And  yet  to  have  my  innocence  accufd.
Is  able  to  pervert  it,  fir,  your  pardon,
1   have  beene  paflionate  ;   pray  love  your  wife, ^/.No,no,iTe  love  thee,  indeede,  indeede  I   will Is  fhee  j'ealous  ?
Pene .   You  know  fhe  has  no  caufe.
TVi.Lz t   us  be  wife ;   and  give  her  caufe, fhalfs  coofe. Pene.Slx,  if  it  be  a   trouble  to  your  Houfe,
Your  breath  (hall  foone  difeharge  me,  I   had  thought The  tie  of  blood  might  have  gain’d  fome  refpeft Difeharge  thee  the  houfe?  i’le  difeharge  her.
And  all  her  generation,  thee  excepted.
And  thou  iliallt  do’t  thy  felfe,  by  this,  thou  fhat,
Ha,  fhe  kifles  with  more  freedome,  tbms  better.
Then  if  my  wife  had  pleaded  for  vsxzfPen^
Thou  (halt  be  miftrefie,woot?comc  thou  /half,
Shee’s  fit  for  drudgerie.  Pene.  Oh,do  notfay  fc.
IV hen  I   wonot,but  I   love  thee  for  thy  fpirit,
Caufe  thou  woot  be  reveng’d,  punifh  her  jealozic
7 be  G amt  {let*
The  right  way, when  ’tis  done,  I   doe  not  care To  tell*her,it  may  kickc  up  her  heeles  too,  another  way.
Pene. Tell  her  what  ?   y   ou  make  me  blufh . fri.No,no,i’le  tell  no  bodie,by  this  hand.
Stay  I   have  a   Diamond  will  become  this  finger,
Wearc  it,  and  let  my  wife  dare  out  her  eyes  upon’t.
Pene.  I   wonot  take  t   on  fuch  conditions.
IVi. Take  it  onany;  fhee  is  come  about.
gnter  Page .
P^.Sir  Mafter  Hazard  defires  your  company  "at  Taverne,he fayes  there  are  none  but  gentlemen  of  your  acquaintance, •   Mafter  Acre-lejfe  ,Ma(\cr  Little-flock?,  and  Matter  Sell-away,  the three  Gamefters.  Wi.Wz  mutt  excufe  me.
Pene.  As  you  love  me,  goe,  fir.
Have  no  fufpition  that  I   wilh  your  abfence,
I’le  weareyour  gift,  and  ftudy  to  be- thankful  1.  Exin
f^i.Well other’s  no  great  hurt  in  all  this  yet  •   .
The  Tides  not  ftrongagaintt  me,  no  talkc  now,  >
Of  wives  confent,  ile  not  remove  my  feige,
Shee’le  ftudie  to  be  thankefiill ,   ttiee* s   mine  o   wne,
As  fure  as  I   were  in  her  maidenhead.
Now  to  theTaverne  boy,and  drinke  to  the  purpofe.  Exeunt* Enter  Hazard,  <iAcre-lefle  Little -flock* ,   Sell-  away,  as in  a   Taveme .   Drawers.
Ha. More  wine,is  not  this  better  gentlemen,  *
Then  fpittingConftables  /   you  wod  have  fought  now,
And  had  y©ur  braine-pannes  open’d Acr. Right  noble  hazard,
Heers  to  thee.
AkrLet  come  boy ,   fill  it  me  fteeplehigh, lam  invaineofmiith,  and  I   hacaufe As  you  ttiall  fee  in  due  time  gentlemen.
Mafter  Little  flocke  thou  art  dreaming  o5th  Dice.
Sel.  Hee’s  melancholic.  Air  Who  I !
Ha.Vte  play  the  farrier  then,and  drench  thee  for  the  fullens  * ahealth  to  all  our  Miftreftes  ,   we  have  had ’em  (ingle,  lctts fhuffle  ’em  now  together.
Mafter  zsfcre-leffe.
Enter  F idler ,
C   3   Fi.
V
The  Gamefler.
FI. Wilt  pleafeyoa  Gentlemen  to  have  a   Song.
Ha. You  have  not  wa  (lit  to  day  , go  get  cleane  manners; Ycuraskall  we  have  no  wenches.
Ftl  fee  no  bodie,fir,  you  liave  wafh’d  my  eyes  out.
Ha. It  is  not  neceiTarie  thou  fhould’fthave  any:
Fill  mee  a   gen.
^rr,This  fellow  wod  ha  t’other  Cup.
Ft. I   have  had  a   Cup  too  much  alreaaie  gentlemen.  Exit. Ha. Let  it  goe  round, and  then  in  hope  you  may Looke  double,  i’ie  fhew  you  a   fight,  I   wonder J   ache  wilding  Stayes.
Enter  Mafler  V/ildingy .   and  Page.  *
Hee’s  come  i’th  nicke.
wi  Save,fave  you  gallants,  may  a   man  come  f   th  reere  ?
Ha. Give  him  his  garniih.
Wi.  Y’are  not  Priloners  for  the  reckning,  I   hope.
Ha.Yor  the  reckning  ?   now  y’are  altogether  gentlemen, rie  fhew  you  a   wonder ;   but  come  not  to  neere,
Keepeout  o’th  Circle, whatfoever  you  thinke  on’t.
This  is  a   hundred  pound,  nay,  not  fo  clofe,
Thefe  Pifturs  do  fliew  bed  at  diidance,  gentlemen.
You  fee  it,  preilo  
Wi.  Nay  lett’s  fee’t  a   gen.
Ha.  Like  to  your  cunning  jugler,  I   ne’re  Lhew My  tricke  but  once,  you  may  heare  more  hereafter.
What  thinke  you  of  this  Maficr  Acre-lefleflA^ex  Little-flock** And  Mailer  Sell- aw  ay  ? esfcr.We  do  not  beleeve  ’tis  gold,
Ha.  Perifh  then
In  your  infidelitie.  Wi.  Let  me  but  touch  it.
™   .It  vvill  indure,take  my'word  for’t,  why  looke  you,
For  your  fatisfadlions,  no  Gloves  off.
You  have  devices  to  dcfolke,  preferve -   Your  talons, and  your  talent till  you  meete With  more  convenient  Gameders.  Lit.  How  earn’d  by  it  ? JFi.Tha’dil  little  or  none  this  morning.
Hal  have  bought  ic  gentlemen,  and  you  in  a   mift Shall  fee  what  I   paid  for  it,thou  hall  not  drunke  yet  :
Nere  feare  the  reckning  man,  more  wine .   you  varletts,
d   And
The  Gamefter .
And  call  your  Miftris,  your  Scolopendia;  / lfwe  like  her  complexion,  \ve  may  dine  here.
jvi.  But  harke  thee, harke  thee  V/UI+ iid’d  winne  it  ?
Ha. No,  but  1   may  loofe  it  ere  I   goe  to  bed ,
Do  ft  think't  ihall  muftie,  what’s  a   hundred  pound  ?
Sel, A   miracle,  but  they  ateceaft  with  me.
Acr. And  me  too,comelett’$  drinke. rri.No  matter, how  it  came  Will ,   I   congratulate Thy  fortune,  and  will  quit  thee  now With  good  newes  of  my  felfe,  my  coofe  I   told  thee  on.,
Is  wheel'd  about,  fhe  has  tooke  a   Ring  o’ me,
We  kift,and  talk’d,  time  out  a   minde.  •   i   -■  -i  ‘
Ha.  I   know  it,
My  Almanacke  fayes  *tis  a   good  day  to  wooe  in,
Confirm’d  by  Err  a   Tater,  that  honeft  Jew  too,
I’le  pledge  thee.
Enter  Drawer.
Dr.  Mafter  Hazard  there  are  two  gentlemen  below, Inquire  for  you.  Ha.  For  me  ?
Da. One’s  fomewhat  ancient,  I   heard  him  call The  tother  Nephew.
Ha. Say  I   come  to  ’em  prefentlie.
Gentlemen,  I   doe  caution  you  before
To  be  faire  conditiond:one  of  them,  the  Nephew
Is  of  a   fierie  conftitution,  %
And  fenfible  of  any  affront,  let  this
Chara&er  prepare  him  for  you.  wi.  Bring  him  not  hither.
Ha.Thcxe  is  a   neceffitie  in  t,  I   wod  not  for A   hundred  pound  but  entertaine  him,  now He  knowes  I   am  here.  Exit.
Enter  Matter  Hazard  agdme,  with  Tarnaclefas Nephew,  and  Dwindle.
JT/.Thisis  old  Barnacle.
Acr. One  that  is  to  fine  for  Alderman.
^   Lit. And  that’s  his  Nephew ,   I   have  beene  in’s  company,
S el.I s   thi  s   the  youth  Hazard  prepard  us  for?
How  buflie  they  are  ?
HaNou  could  not  wifli  better  opportunistic,
Thefe  are  all  gentlemen  of  qualitie,
rle
The  Gmefter*
Vie  call  him  cozen  firft,if  it  pleafe  you,
To  endeare  him  to  their  acquaintance.  _
Bar.Ylc  not  be  a   witneffe  of  your  paffages  my  lelfe ;   mefe will  report  as  much  as  I   defire,(ir,if  you  be  beaten  I   am  fatiinedc Afc.But  d’ee  heare  Uncle,  are  fure  you  have  made Your  bargaine  wifelie  ;they  may  cut  my  throat When  you  are  gone, and  what  are  you  the  witer ,
Jlwindle  be  you  clofe  to  me.
Hal  warrant  you  we  ihall  do  things  with  difcrction5 If  he  have  but  grace  ,to  looke  and  talke  couragiouflie.
Bar,  He  may  be  valiant  for  ought  I   know,
Howfoever  this  will  be  afecure  way
To  have  him  thought  fo,  if  he  beateyoufoundlie.
A7*J  doe  not  like  the  company ;
But  1   have  drunke  wine  too,  and  that  s   the  beflonV We  maiequarrell  on  even  Termer,  looke  to Thy  ba sket-hik  D   mndle,  and  have  a   ftoole  readie ;
Dw.l  will  ^ive  your  worfhip  a   ftoole,
Ha. As  lam  gentleman,  be  confident rle  waite  on  you  downc,  fir.
Bar.  By  no  meanes,lethim  beate  you  to  purpofe,fir.
Ne.  Buy  Unde-  v   Exit .
Ha. Come, fir,  pray  gentlemen,  bid  my  kinfman  welcome : a   fp.irkethat  will deferve  your  knowledge.
Wk  His  kinfnTan  ?   you  are  welcome.  - Llcr. Wo  bas  power  to  command  your  welcome.
Lit. If  I   miftake  not,  I   have  had  the  happineffe To  habeenein  your  companie  afore  now.  •
A^.Mine,(ir  ?   d’ee  heare,  what  if  I   quarrel’d With  him  firft  ?   ’twill  prepare  me  the  better.
HaJjo  as  you  pleafe  ‘that’s  without  my  conditions.  1 AV.I'lebut  give  him  now  and  then  a   touch,iTe  clofe Well  enough  I   warrant  you,  you  beene  in  my Companie,  fir?
Zz/.Yes^and.at  the  Taverne.  Ne.l  paid  the  reckning  then, Ur. You  came  into  our  roome — - Afc.Tellmeof  comminginto  your  roome.
Tie  come  againe,  you  are  a   luperfiuous  gentleman,
JUI.  How’s  this  ?
The  Gamefter.
Ha. Let  him  alone.
Lie.  Sir  x   remember  y.our  felfe.
AV.rie  remember  what  /pleafe,i*le  forget  what I   remember:  tell  me  of  a   reckning ,   what  ift  ?
I’le  pay’t,  no  man  fhall  make  an  affe  of  me.
Further  then  I   lift  my  felfe,  I   care  not  a   fiddle- Stickcforany  mans  thundring,  he  that  affronts Ye, is  the  fonne  of  a   Worme,  and  his  father  a Whoore,  1   care  not  a   draw,  nor  a   broken  point For  you, if  any  man  dare  drinke  to  me ;   f Wonot  goe  behind  the  dore  to  pledge  him.
Acr,  Why  her’s  to  you ,   fir,
W^.Why  there’s  to  you,  fir.
Twit  mee  with  comming  into  a   Roome  ,   f   could  finde in  my  heart ,   to  throw  a   Pottle-pot ,   /   name  no  bodie,:  I will  kickc  any  man  downs  Stayres  ,   that  tcannot  behave himfelfe  like  a   gentleman ,   none  but  a   fiave  would  offer  to paie  a   reckning  before  me,  where’s  the  Drawer  ?   ther’s  a peece  at  all  adventures  5   hee  that  is  my  friend ,   /cars  not a   rufh  ,   if  any  man  be  my  enemie,he  is  an  idle  companion,  and I   honor  him  with  all  my  heart.
Wl  This  is  a   precious  humor,  is  he  ufd  to  thefe  miftakes  ?
Lit. Your  kinfinan  gives  him  priviledge.
Ne.l  defire  no  mans  priviledge, it  skills  not  whether  J   be  kin to  any  man  living.
H^.Nay,nayd  cozen,  pray  let  me  perfwade  you.
Ne.  You  perfwade  me  ?   for  what  acquaintance,  miitde  your bufines  and  fpeake  with  your  Tailor.
Ha. And  you  be  thus  rude  
He.  Rude,  fir,  what  then , fir, hold  me  Dwindle .
cDw.  Are  you  readie  to  have  a   ftoole,  fir  ?
JF/.Nay,  nay  JVill,  we  beare  with  him  for  your  fake5 He  is  your  kinfman.
Ha.  I   am  calmeagen.
Cozen,  I   am  forry  any  perfbn  here Hath  given  you  offence.
N^.Perhapps,  fir,  you Have  given  me  offence,  f   do  not  feare  you,
I   have  knock’d  as  round  a   fellow  in  my  dayes,
DA  Ha .
The  Gmefter.
Ha.  And  may  againe —
m. Be  knock’d, a   poxuponhim,  I   .know  not’ whatTo  make cn  him.
Ha. Let  me  fpeake  a   word  in  private,  hr.
Ne.  I   can  be  as  private  as  you,  Hr.
Ha. Strike  me  afcox  o’th  eare  prefentlie.
Ne.  Ther’s  my  hand  on’t.  ^>.Nay3nay gentlemen*
&Acr.  Rafter  Wilding.
Ne. Let  him  call  me  to  account,  the  recknings  paid;
Come  Dwindle.  Exit.
Sel.l  did  not  thinke  the  foole  durftha  done  this,
Tis  a   ftrange  youth.
Ha.Yon  (hall  heare  more  to  morrow.
Dr.  All’s  paid,and  you  are  welcome  gentlemen.  Exeunt,
Enter  Leon  at  a ,   Viol  ante.
Leo  Why  fihould  not  we  two  live  together,  being So  equal!  in  our  paHIons  ?   oh  Vtolante ,
Our  knowledge  grew  from  children  %   and  our  loves Allieusiri  our  natures,
Vio.  Tis  >my  wifh
To  dwell  with  thee,  I   never  knew  that  woman In  whom  I   tooke  more  pkafiire  to  converfe  with/
Z<f0.But  I   have  a   father,  and  remembringhim A   forrow  (leaks  upon  me,  to  betraie My  hopes  of  blefllng;for  although  hee  love  me,
And  deerelie  as  he  fayes,  for  Children  mu  ft  not Difpute  with  fathers,  he  afifedls  not  him In  whom  I   place  all  thoughts  that  can  delight  me.
He  loves  not  Delamore,  and  what  to  me Is  all  the  World  without  him  ?   I   fihall  never I   feare  ,   have  his  confent  to  be  made  happie In  marriage,  and  thi  ,   although  our  thoughts Refed!  with  equall  honor  on  our  lovers,  •
Makes  the  diftincftion,  and  concludes  memiferable,
I   hy  will  depends  upon  no  riged  parent,
Thy  path  is  fire w’d  with  Rofes,  while  I   clime A   ragged  clifife,  to  meete  whom  I   a   fifed!.
VioJndczdc,Leonara  I   much  pitie  thee.
Leo, I   prethee  counfell  me  how  flial!  I   wraftle With  my  fad  deftinie,  and  yet  preferve
'           ^
The  G 'ameffer.
My  filiall  obedience,  I   muft  loofe A   father ,   or  a   husband.
V'to; Would  /knew
Which  way  to  bid  thee  fteere,  but  le  (Ton'd  by My  owne  affedlion,/ would  have  thy  minde Con (1  ant  to  him  thou  loud:,  time  may  corre/f A   fathers  harfhnes,  and  be  confident If  poore  Viol  ante  havea  power  to  ferve  thee,
She  will  forget  her  owne  heart, ere  prove  ftlfe  to  thee, Leo. Oh  my  deare  foule,  I   know’t.
Enter  Servant ,
Ser.  Oh  miftrefle.
Leo.  What's  the  matter  /
Z^.This  facebetraiesfome  miferable  accident. X^.Speake,and  affure  us,  what  difafter  makes Thy  countenance  fo  wilde.
Ser.  A   friend  of  yours — - Lfo. Is  ficke,is  dead,  what  more  ?   and  yet  l   hav  e So  few,  /canfpare  none Ser .   Is  dead,(ince  you  appeare  fo  fortified.
Leo. Is  my  father  living,  and  Delamore  ?
-SVr.Your  father  is  in  health ,   but     — ^
Leo.Staic,  as  thou  wouldft  prefer ve  thy  miftreffe  in The  number  of  the  living.
Vio. How  my  feares  increafe  1 Leo. Except  Violante-  whom  /   fee En/oyes  her  health  have  no  friend  but  Delamore^
I   hope  hee  is  not  dead.
*5o\Your  Delamore  is  dead.  S hee  faints.  -
Vi.  Friend,  Leonora ,
5Twas  indifcreetlie  done  to  open  forrow So  like  a   torrent,  Leonora  •   mend.
^   Leo. Why  doft  thou  call  me  from  him  ?   fure  /   was Going  to  meete  my  Delamore .
Vi.  Give  not  fuch
Beleefe  to  thefe  fad  newes,  untill  you  heare  it Confirm’d, dift  fee  him  dead?  Ser .   I   did  not  fee  him.
Vi.  Have  comfort  then,  this  may Bee  check’d  againe.
D   2.
The  Gmefttr.
LeoiW ould  I   could  hope  it.
Vio.  Have  more  courage  friend,
Didftheare  the  circum  fiance  ?
Ser.  He  was  flame  they  fay.
Vio. Nay  then  beleeve  it  not, he  was  fo  innocent, Hccouldprovokenoangrie  fwordagain'd  him.
Ser.l  wifliyour  confidence  were  not  deceav’d^
The  laft  part  of  my  ftorie  will  concerne Your  faith,  and  forrow.
Vio,  Mine  ?   in  her  !   fhare Too  much, but  prethee  fince  thou  haft  not  beene Slow  to  wound  her,  let  me  know  my  affliction.
Scr.lhc  generall  voice  is, Maher  Beaumontfe W   him* Yourfervant  Ladie..
Vio. Tell  the  generall  voice It  lyes,  my  ‘Beaumont  prove  a   murderer  ?
And  of  his  friend  ?   he  would  not  kill  an  enemie.
Ser,  All  I   can  fay  in  proole  of  this,  I   faw  him Guarded  to  Prifon,  pardon  my  relation.
Vio.  if  thou  beleevefl:  thy  eyes  abuf’dthee  not,
Thou  might’ll:  with  one  breath  ipoken ’em  both  dead,
For  the  furvivor  lives,  but  to  give  up
His  life  with  more  flhame ,   all  my  comfort  is,
I   /hall  not  live  to  fee  it ,   oh  Leonora ,
Who  is  moll  wretched  now  ?   let  thou,  and  I,
The  few  dayes  that  we  have  to  live,  be  friends.
And  die  in  perfect  charitie,  I   muft  leave  you To  manage  your  owne  griefe,  I   have  enough To  breake  my  poors  heart  too.  j&a
Leo.  What  Seas  breake-in Upon  us  ?   I   that  could  have  dyed  within A   gentle  wave,  now  ftrugglefoi  my  life.
My  father  ?
Enter  Sr.  Richard  Hurry a
Hu. What,  it  feemes  you  heard  the  newes.
Gome  let  your  forrowes  drie  up,  you  may  fee .
What  tis  to  be  fo  rafh,  when  you  chufe  next, You’leconfult  me,  1   hope  •   wipe,  wipe  your  eyes, Vpur  tearcs  are  vaine,  I   could  fay  more.
7   h   Game fler*
Leo.  What  fir  ?   .
Hu. They  are  more  then  he  deferv’d,and  yet  tis  better Thou  fhouldftbeftow  thy  teares  upon  his  Funerall, Then  I   figh’d  at  thy  marriage  ;come,  Heaven  has Beene  kinde  in  this  divorce ,   preparing  thus Thy  better  fortune, and  preferving  mine,
I   am  forrie  for  the  gentleman  that  kild  him.
Leo.  Oh  Murderer.
Hu. You  are  a   fbole,  and  know  not His  provocation:  in  my  youthful  1   dayes,
I   was  not  patient  when  affronts  were  offred  me, Nothing  more  deere  to  gentlemen,  then  honor.
Zffl.Honor  in  murder?
Hu. This  was  otherwife.- In  my  owne  defence  I   would  kill  a   family, Hefhew’d  his  generous  fpirit,  all  the  towne Speakes  noblie  of  him, pity  him,  and  pray  for  him, And  werehe  not  defertfull,  by  this  time The  generall  vote  had  bang’d  him.
Leo.Oh,  myfate/
Hu.  Tother  a   loofe,  and  inconfiderate  man.
Loft  in e Rate,  and  would  ha  married  thee.
To  ha  fqueefd  mine, ’tis  better  asit-is,
2>0.Good  fir,  be  charitable  to  the  dead.
Hu. Be  you  firft  charitable  to  the  living .
Speake  well^md  thinke  fb  too,  you  do  not  know What  benefit  may  follow,  and  how  ere Your  womanifh  forrow  for  the  prefentmay So  mift  your  eyes,  they  will  hereafter  open,
To  fee,  and  thanke  my  care.
Leo.  Indeede  your  language, .
Pardon  my  boldneffe,  fir,  isdarkea'nd  myflicall.
Hu. You  have  your  wit  to  apprehend  fometimes. But ’tis  not  paflionmuftexcuft  your  dutie  to  me.
Leo.  1   hope.
Hu.Your  hopes  may  faile  you  if  you  doe 3 Be  obedient  hereafter,'  if  youpleafe.
And  love  my  di redions
Leo.  Pie  not  have
D   3
The  Game  [fey.
A   thought  fhall  difobcy  you,  and  if  ever I   love  agen.
Hu. If  ever  ?   why  fuppofe I   fliould  propound  one  to  you,  now  i’th  heate Of  this  miifbrtune,can  your  heart  be  obftinate To  me,  and  your  owne  good  ?
Leo .   This  is  too  loone A   confcience, fir,  before  his  blood  be  cold.
To  whom  /   profeft  love,  to  like  another  ?
The  W orld  would  much  condemne  me.
Hu.  Is  the  World
Or  I   to  be  prefer’d,  this  makes  the  acb Of  your  obedience  perfect,  and  becauie Tie  have  affurance  of  what  power  /hold.
This  minute  i’lepveferre  one  to  your  thoughts,
Difpofe  your  heart  to  love  the  gentleman That  now’s  in  Prifon.
Leo .   Whom  d’ee  meane  deere  fir  /
Hu. He  that  kild  Delamore,  Maher  Beaumont  i Doe  not  fufpeCt  /   trifle,  he  is  of A   noble  houfe,  of  a   faire  expectation,
Handfome  in  every  part.
Leo .   Shall  net  hee  fuffcr For  the  blacke  deede  alreadie  done?
Hu.  Compofc
Your  felfe  to  love  him,  i   le  finde  a   waie  how  to Secure  his  life., and  bring  him  freelie  off.  *
Leo. Oh  •   confider  ere  you  move  to  farr; if  having  flaine  my  comfort,  for  1   mult Give  it  no  other  name,  call  not  your  juftice To  my  revenge,  yet  let  me  not  be  forc’d.
To  have  a   thought  fo  full  of  fhamc  to  women.
That  he  fliould  be  my  husband,  ’tis  a   flaine Time  nor  repentance  can  warn  off,  I   know You  cannot  meane  fo  cruel li:,befide 1   fhall  commit  a   finne,  foule  as  his  murther.
Upon  poore  Vtolante ,   and  rob  her :
Their  heart’s  love  hath  feald  up  i'th  eye  of  Heaven, ’Twere  facriledge  to  part  cm,  fliee’s  my  friend  too,
One
The  Gamefler.
One  that  will  rather  die  then  injure  me.
And  he  will  rather  fuffer,rif  he  be Noble  as  you  profefFc  him,  then  content  to So  foule  a   guilt.
Hu.  Let  me  alone  for  that,
2f  he  refufe  this  offer  for  his  life.
Why  let  him  die^’le  put  him  too’t ,   confider,
Jn  this  I   foall  behold  thy  naked  foule.
Be  rul’d,and  profper  *   difobey,  and  be
Throwne  from  my  care  and  blood,  at  better  leafure
I’le  tell  you  more.  Exit.
Z^.Has  Heaven  no  pity  for  me?
What  killing  language  doth  a   father  fpeake  ?
Poore  hart  prevent  more  greite,  and  quickly  breake.  Exit,
Aa.iiL
Enter  M after  Willing ,   and  Penelope.
^ .This  humour  does  become  thee,  /   knew  when Thou  did  ft  confider,what  was  offerd  thee  •
Thy  fullennes  wood  fhake  offenow  thou  look’d:  - Frefher  then  morning,  in  thy  melancholic Thy  clothes  became  thee  not- Pene.  Y’are  i’th  right,  .
I   blam'd  my  Tailor  for’tybiit  I   finde  now.
The  fault  was  in  my  countenance,  wo’d  we  had Some  Muficke,  I   could  dance  now,la,la,la,bra,&c, fvi.  Excellent  l   and  fhee  be  a   bed  but  haife  fo  nimble, I   fhallhave  a   fine  time  on  t;how  fhe  glides  ?
Thou  wot  not  faile  ?   Ten.  This  night-Z-
TVi.h t   the  houre  of  twelue.
PeneJ&ut  you  mud  be  as  punctual  1   ith  conditions For  my  vowes  fake,  not  fpeake  a   fyllable.
wi.  I’le  rather  cut  my  tongue  out  then  offend  thee, Killing  is  no  language.
T^.lfitbenot  to  loude;
We  mu  ft  not  be  feene  together,  to  avoids
the  Gamefter.
Sufpition,I  would  not  for  a   world  my  cozen Should  know  on’t.
tv'k Slice  fhall  die  in  ignorance.
Pene.  Nopeece  of  a   Candle.
^i.The  Diveli  fhall  not  fee  us With  hisfawcer  eye? ;   and  if  he  {tumble  in The  darke, there  ihanot  be  a   Clone  ith  Chamber,
To  (hike  out  fire  with’s  homes  ;   all  things  fhall  bee*
So  clofe ;   no  lightning  lliall  peepe  in  upon  us,
Qh,  howl  long  for  mid-night  !
Pene.  1   haveafcruple.
*tf?.Oh,by  no  meanes,  no  fcruples  now.
Pene .   When  you
Have  your  defires  upon  me,  you  will  foone Crow  cold  in  your  afieftion,  and  negled  me.
^fWhyhang  meifIdoe,i’le  love  thee  ever  :
I   have  call  already,  to  preierve  thy  honor.
Thou  fhalt  be  married  in  a   fortnight,  cooze.
Let  me  alone  to  finde  thee  out  a   husband,
Handfomc  and  fit  enough, we  will  love  then  too.
Pene.  When  I   am  married  ?
^ .Without  feare  or  wit Qum  priv'tlegio ,   when  thou  haft  a   husband,
Doft  thinke  I   will  forfake  thee  Pen  f   ’twere  pity A   my  life,fweete,oh  there  is  no  pleafiire To  thofe  embraces  ;   I   fhall  love  thee  better.
And  the  aftlirance  that  thou  haft  two  fathers Before  thou  haft  a   child,  will  make  theefpring More  a&ive  in  my  armes,  and  I   tell  thee ,
Tis  my  ambition  to  make  a   Cuckold,
The  onely  pleafure  o’th  World:  I   wod  not Wiih  to  injoy  thee  now,  but  in  the  hope Of  tother  harveft,  and  to  make  thy  husband Hereafter  cuckold,  that  imagination Sweetnes  the  reft,  and  I   do  love  it  mainely,  mainely. Pene. Tis  double  finne. wi. Tis  treble  pleafure  wench ;
But  wc  loofe  time, and  may  endanger  thus My  wifeintoa  jealozie, if  fheefeeus.
The  Gamcfler •
rarewcl  1, fire  well  deare  Pen.  at  night  remember,
1   wonot  loofe  my fport  for  halfe  the  countrie,  Exh .
Enter  MiSirh  JV tiding.
Mi.wl Thou  haft  hit  my  inflruflions  excellently.
Pene.l  have  made  worke  for  fome  bodie,ycu  have  put  me Upon  a   defperate  fervice,  if  you  do  net Releeve  me,  I   am  finely  ferved.
Mi.  All  has  fucceeded  to  my  wifli  ,   thy  place I   will  (upply  to  night ,   if  he  obferve All  the  conditions,  I   may  deceive Mv  husband  into  kindnes ;   and  we  both Live  to  reward  thee  better,  oh ,   deere  coo/e  /
Take  heede  by  my  example,  upon  whom Thouplaceft  thy  affeettion.
Enter  Hazard.  *
Pene.  Matter  Hazard.
Ha  Save  miftreffe  Wilding.
Mi  JVi.  You  are  welcome, fir.
Pene. He  is  a   handfome  gentleman,
Ha. Gone  abroad  ?
Mi. I   am  not  certaine,  i’le  inquire.
Ha.  Your  fervant.
Ha  1   this  is  thefroftie  gentlewoman, in  good  time,
I   care  not  if  I   calt  away  fome  words  on  her,
And  yet  fhees  fo  precife,  and  over  honett,
I   had  as  good  nere  atempt  her,  your  name  is ‘Penelope, l   take  it  Lady ,
Pene.  If  you  take  it,
I   hope  youTe  give  it  me  agen.
LLz.What  agen  ?   Pene  My  name.
LA*. What  fhould  I   doe  wo;  ?
No, no,  keepe  thy  name.
How  ere  thou  doft  thy  maiden-head.
Pene.  Can  you  tell  me
Ofany  honett  man  that  I   male  truft  with  it  ?
Ha.V le  tell  thee  a   hundred.
Pene  .Take  heede  what  you  faie,  fir.
A   hundred  honett  men,  why  if  there  were So  many  i’thCity,  ’twere  enough  to  forfeit
*   E   There
The  Gamefter.
Their  Charter ;   but  perhaps  you  live  in  the  Suburbs.
Ha. This  wench  will  jeere  me.
Pene.  I   hope  you  are  not  one>  fir,
Ha, One  of  what  ?
Pene.Qne  of  thofe  honed  men  you  talk’d  of  lb.
One  to  whofe  frud,  a   Virgin  might  commit A   maiden-head,  as  you  call  it.
Ha.  Yes,  you  may  trud  me,
I   have  poflett  a   hundred  maiden-heads.
Pent .   How  long?
Ha,  Nay,  nay ;they  are  no  commodities  to  keepe,
Nee  fault  of  ours:  truth  is,  th’are not  worth Preferving,fome  of  your  owne  Sex  acknowledge  it,
And  yet  by  your  complexion,  you  have  yours  ftil).
Away  with’t,  and  in  time.
Pcne.  Why  you  are  moded.
Ha.  Y   avehit  me  Lady:  come, Me  give  thee  couniel!^
And  more, i’le  helpe  thee  to  a   chap -man  too,
Befides  what  ere  he  pales  for’t  ,   fhall  be  at  charge To  mold  it  of  himfeife;  how  light  thou  slt  be Without  thy  maiden-head,  doft  not  fpoile  thy  fieepe And  breede  the  night-mare  ?
Pcne. Who  can  helpe  it,  you Gentlemen  are  fuch  (1  range  creatures,  fo  unnatural  I,
So  infinitilie  chad,  fo  mortified
With  Beefe  and  Barly- water,  fuch  drange  difeipline.
And  Hpre-cloth.
Ha. Who  weares  Haire-cloth  ?   gentlewoman  ?
Peue. Such  fevere  waies  to  tam*  your  fiefh,  fuch  friends To  fry-dayes,Lent,and  Ember- weekes  ;fuch  enemies To  Sackc,  and  marrow-Pies,  Caudles,  and  Crabs,
I   idlers ,   and  other  warme  rertoratives,
A   handfome  woman  can  not  reach  your  pity.
We  may  e’en  grow  to  our  Pillowes,  ere  youTe  comfort  us; this  was  not  wont.
Ha. Not  wont  to  be,  in  my Remembrance  Ladie.
Pene. You  area  handfome  gentleman Why  may  not  you  drinke  Wine  fometimes,or  eate
Sturgion^
The  Gnmejler.
Sturgion,  or  forrage  in  your  luftie-pie
Of-  Aartichokc,  or  Potato ;   or  why  may  not
Your  learned  Phyfition  Di&ate  amber-Grcece,
Or  Powder?,  and  yon  obey  him,  in  your  Brothes  ?
Have  you  fo  ftrarige  antipathy  to  women?
To  what  end  will  gentlemen Come  to  ,if  this  f   rod  hold  ?
Ha,  You  are  wittie  •
But  I   fuppofoyouhaveno  caufe  of  fuch Complaint,  how  ever  fome  men  do  want  heat,
Their  is  no  generall  winter  ;   I   know  a   gentleman  — ,
Can  drinke,andeate,and  beare  you  companie A   bed,  for  all  your  jeering :   do  not  thinke Tis  I:  thou  fball  recant  this  prophane  talkc And  wooemefora  kifife,  ere  i*le  ftoope  to  thee.
Heres  none  but  friends,  if  Matter  wilding  ha  hot
Told  you  alreadie,  I   will  judifie
Tis  pottttblc ,   you  may  be  got  with  Child*
Pent,  By  whom  ?
^.By  him, you  are  but  cozens  a   farre  off.
If  you  allow ’t ,   he  neede  not  travel  1   farre Tor  other  difpenfation,  what  fay  to  him  ?
Pene,  Was  this  at  his  entreatie  ?
Ha,  My  owne  meere  motion And  good  will  toward  him,  caufe  I   know  his  gunde<
Tene, You  are  a   fine  gentleman,  wher’s  your  land  l You  may  be  Knight  o’ th  Shire  intime  :farrewell,  fir.
Ha, I   know  not  what  to  make  on  her, (he  may  be  Exit, A   tumbler, for  all  thrs,iie  to  her  agen.  Exit,
Enter  old  rBarnaclcJand  Leonora.
Ba.  Nay, nay, be  comforted,  and  mi  ft  ake  me  not,
I   did  not  mention  Delamorc  to  provoke Thefe  teares:hee’sgone,  thinke  on  your  living  friends. Z^.Ifyou  be  one,  good  fir- — ■
*Ba.  Yes,  I   am  one:
And  yet  miftake  me  not,  I   doe  not  come A   wooing  for  my  felfe,I  am  paft  Tilting,
But  for  my  Nephew ,   oh  that  Nephew  of  mine  i I   know  S   \ Ric har d   Harry,  your  wife  father,
E   2
Will
The  C amefter*
VV  ill  thinke  well  of  him>
Nay  ,nay ,   weeping  ftill.
Leo.  It  is  too  loone  to  thinke  of  an/  other  * iW.Tofoone  to  thinke  of  any  other,  why.
What  woman  of  difcretion,  but  is  fum idl’d With  a   fecond  husband  ere  the  firftbe  coffend  ?
He  that  ftayes  till  the  f   unerall  be  pad,
Is  held  a   modeft  coxcombe,  and  why  Ihould  not Maides  be  as  early  in  their  provifion  ?   .
Leo. I   blufh  to  thinke,  my  father  of  his  mind, Diftreflbd  Leonora  good,  hr  loofe No  more  breath,  /amrefolvcd-todie  a   Virgin I   know  not  what  love  is.  /•,.  ^   .
And  yet  thefe  teares Are  fhed  for  one  you  lov’d.
Leo.  He  that  was  all
My  treafnre  living,  beeing  loft  mud  needs Be  a   great  part  of  forrow:  but  my  eyes Though  they  can  never  paie  to  many  drops To  the  fad  memory  of  Delaware,
Shed  not  all  thefe  for  him,  there  is  another That  makes  me  weepe.  •
Bar.  Another  whom  you  love  ? i>0.Heaven  knowes  I   never  let  into  my  heart, AffedUon  to  a   fecond,  Iamfofarre from  loving  him,  I   wifh  we  may  here  meete, lam  not  fafe  in  my  owne  bofome,  while I   thinke  upon  him,  it  begets  newfprings Within  my  eyes ;   which  will  in  litle  time,
Kifeto  a   hood,  anddrowneme.
Bar.  I   conceive
This  is  no  friend  ofy ours,  comei’le  releeve  you, Nay,  and  there  be  any  man  that  troubles  you,
]f  there  be  any  you’d  have  talk’d  withal].
He  rid  you  of  that  care,  he  that  lliall  offer But  to  diftuibe  you  in  a   thought,  d’ee  marke  me  ’? He  take  an  ^rder  with  him.
.   Leo.  What  willjyou  doe  ?   '
^r.Do  not  miftake  me  neither^  i’le  do  nothing,
7   be  Game(!erm
But  fend  my  Nephew ,   he  (hall  top  him,
And  top  him,  and  fcourge him  like  a   top  too.
You  know  not  how  my  Nephfw  is  improv’d Since  you  laft  favv  him,  valiant  as  Hercules ,
He  has  knock’d  the  flower  of  Chivalry, the  verie
Donzat  dclPhebo  of  the  time,  and  all
The  Blades  do  reverence  himplefay  no  more,—
Name  but  the  man  whom  you  do  frowne  upon.
And  let  me  fend  my  Nephew  to  him.
Leo .   Shanot  neede.
I   have  no  caemie  to  engage  his  fword,
My  difcontents  flow  from  a   neerer  perfon,
I   grieve  to  fay  my  father.
Bar.  How  ?   your  father Say  but  the  word  and  I   will  fend  my  Nephew To  him,and  he  were  ten  fathers  he  can  mollifie  him.
To  pleafcyou  Lady,  my  Nephew  never  fpare  him.
Oh,  had  you  feene  him  baffle  a   fquire  this  morning  !
Lco.Vtzy  no  more, you  ihall  do  me  a   noble  office To  leave  me  to  my  feife.
Enter  Servant. iSVr.Miftrefle  Viol  ante Is  come  to  vifit  you.
Leo.  I   waite  upon  her.
Your  gentle  pardon.  Exit.
Ba. Would  my  Nephew  had  her.!
Shee  is  S   .   Richards  heire,  and  here  he  is.
S   .   Richard ?
Enter  S   .Richard  Hurry  ,   and  Surgeon.
Hu. Qh  Mafter  Barnacle }   fie  waite  upon  you.
Bar.  That’s  Mafter  Probe  the  Surgeon.  —
^.No  more  you  know  my  meaning.
Er.  Yes/ir.  Hu.  Let  him  be  buried.
Br  I   underftand  you,  fir.  Exit.
Bar.  I   have  beene  difeourfing With  your  faire  daughter.
Hu.  Where  is  Leonora  ?
Ser .   Shee’s  within,  fir.
Hu.  Bid  her  come  hither,
E   3
Mafter
>*’  7   heGmeftrr.'
Mafter,' 'Barnacle I   am  fomething  troubled  about  a   gentleman* 'Bar,  And  I   am  glad  I   met  with  you:
^   I   f   you  be  troubled  with  any  gentleman,
I’le  fend  my  Nephew  to  him.
Hu. To  whom,or  whither  ?
Bar, To  any  man  alive,  /   care  not  whether.
Hu.  Send  him  toj  erufalem.
'   'Bar .That’S  fomething  o’ th  farth-eft,  I   (hail be Unwilling  he  Ifrould  travell  out  o’th  Kingdome,
Enter  Leonora 3   Viol  ante  aloof e ,   <
Hu.  Leonera  ?   Neerer   *
Ba.  Who  is  that  ?
Aprettie  gentlewoman  /   five  you  miftreffe*
What  is  your  name  I   pray  ?
Vio,  I   am  cal  d   Violante,
Bar,  Are  you  a   maide  ?
Vio,  Ifhouldbe  forrie  elfe.
2?^.D’ee  know  my  Nephew  f Flo.  Not  I,  fir.
— ^r.Not  my  Nephew  ?   how  have  you  beenebred  ? Whyhee’sthe  onley  gallant  o’thTowne,
Heafe  you  i’le  fend  him  to  you.
Vio,  What  to  doe,  fir.
Ba.Uc  fhall  do  any  thing, the  townes  afraid 'on  him.
Vio, Oh  1   praie  keepe  him  from  me  then.
^r.Hee’le  hurt  no  women,  but  for  the  men — - Vio. Tber’s  one  has  hurt  to  much  alreadie.
Bar. What  is  he  ?   i’le  fend  my  Nephew  to  hkn  Lady,
If  you  We  any  occafion,  never  fpare  him.
Vio ,   Not  I,  fir.  j
Hu.  Looke  to’t,  and  correal  this  humor.
Y   ie  to  him  prefentlie,  Matter  Barnacle ,
Let  me  intreat  your  compand  to  a   gentleman,  *
Pie  waite  as  much  on  you.
Bar.  You  fhall  command  mce.- If’t  be  to  any  man  you  care  not  for,
Wee’le  take  my  Nephew  along.  Exeunt.
Hu,  It  fha  not  neede,
Leo ,   Oh  Violante  !   I
Muft
The  Gamefkr.
Muft  now  require  fome  fruite  of  all  thy  promifcs.
Vio. You  hold  jne  not  fufpe&ed.
Leo .   Leonora
Cannot  be  fo  i« grateful! ;   but  we  have
Small  limit  for  difeourfe ,   my  lather  m canes
To  vifit  Beaumont ,   now  in  Prifon  ,   thou
Wilt  heare  too  foonethe  ftorie,  and  without
Prevention  findc  thy  felfe  more  miferabie-
Oh  Violante  :   I   will  fuffer  with  him
Rather  then  injure  thee  ,   1   prethee  go
Ll.ifit  thy  friend ,   not  mine,  and  as  thou  loti’ft  me1,
As  thou  lou’fthim,  or  thy  ownc  li  feyViolante, Bidhimbeconflant  to  thee,  tell  him  what  fame Dwells  upon  noble  lovers,  that  have  feal’d Faith  to  their  Miftreffes  in  blood;  what  glorie Can  perjur’d  men  expedf,  that  loofe  their  honor To  fave  a   poore  breath  ?   bid  him  be  affur’d.
If  for  the  hope  of  life,  his  foule  can  be So  much  corrupted  to  embrace  a   thought That  I   iliall  ever  love  him — *
Vio.  You  Leonora  ?
Z^.Never,  oh, never;  tell  him  fo  :   by  verttie.
And  the  cold  bloodofmyflaineD^w^,
Although  my  father  threaten  death.
Pto .   Your  father  ?
i>0.Make  haft  fweete  Violante^to  the  Prifon;
There  thou  fhalt  know  all,  there  thou  fhalt  have  proofe How  much  thou  art  belov’d,  and  by  my  death ,
If  he  prove  falfe  to  thee,how  much  I   love  thee.  Exit.
Flo: I   am  amaz’d,  and  my  foule  much  diftra&ed Twixt  griefe,  and  wonder,  it  growes  late  i’th  morning* l   ie  vifitthefad  Prifoner,  my  hart  trembles.
More  can  but  kill  me  too.  I’m,  fit  to  die.
And  woes  but  haften  immortality.  Exit,
Enter  Hazard,  and  a   E ox-keeper 9 £   Fla.  How  now  ?   what  Game  [hr  s   ?
^.Little  to  any  purpofe  yet, but  wc Expecft  deepe  play  to  right.
Snter  JVtldinq,
m.
7 'be  Gmtfter.
Wk  Will  Hazard,  Ihavcbeene  fceking  thee  this Twohowcrs,  and  now  I   have  found  thee, avoids  me.
Ha.  1   har’t  not  infe&ious.
W.No,but  I   fwell  with  my  imaginations Like  a   tall  Ship,  bound  for  the  fortunate  Hands;
Top,  and  Top-gallant,  my  hags,  and  my  figarics Upon  me  with  a   luftie  gale  of  winde Able  to  rend  my  fades,  I   fhall  o’rerunne,
Andfinke  thy  little  Barke  of  underftanding In  my  careere  boy.
Ha.  Pray  heaven  rather You  do  not  fpring  a   leake,  and  forfit  your Ballad, my  confident  man  of  Warre,  I Have  knowne  as  Bout  a   Shipbeene  caft  away In  fight  o’th  Harbour.
Wi. The  wench  ,   the  wench  boy.
Ha.  The  Veffell  you  have  beene  chafing.
?F/.Has  ftrooke  Saile,
^Is  come  in ,   and  cries  abord  my  new  Lord  of -   The  Mediterranean ,   we  arc  agree’d.
This  is  the  pretious  night  fri//;twelve  the  bower.
That  I   mult  take  poficfiion  cf  all,
Of  all;  there  are  fome  Articles  agreed  on.
Enter  a   Lord ,   and  Sell- away.
Whoe’s  this  ?
Ha.  Oh  /the  Gameflers  now  come  in:
That  gaie  man  is  a   Lord,  and  with  him  Sell- away. J^i.They  are  well  coupled,  a   Lord  and  Sell-avray.
Ha. He  weares  good  clothes  you  fee, and  in  the  ftreet More  look’d  at  then  the  Pageants, he  will  talke  litle.
Wi.  To  purpofe.
Hal  Right,  he  cannot  walke "Out  of  his  fincopace,  and  no  man  carries -   Legs  more  in  tune, he  is  danc’d  now  from  his  fempfirefie. Wi.\  man  mnch  bound  to  his  Tailor.
Ha.  And  his  Barber.
He  has  a   notable  head.  wi.  Of  ha  ire  thou  mean'ft.
Abz.Which  is  fometime  hung  in  more  Bride-laces Then  well  would  furnilli  out  two  Country  weddings
The  Gamefler .
#4.IsheaScholler  ?   [j
ha.  Tis  not  necefiary.
He  is  neither  Scholler,  nor  a   Courtier,
If  report  wrong  him  not.
IVl.Vydl.Wz  playes  mony  freely.
//rf.With  more  pride  then  he  wearcs  embrodcry .
Tis  his  ambition  to  loofe  that :   and A   wench  mainetaines  his  fwearing,  let  himpaflfe.
VV't.  What’s  next.
Enter  a   Knight,  and  tsfcre-leflc,
Ha.  A   Knight,  and  Acre-lejfe.
VVk  Good  agen,a  Knight  and  Acre-lejJ'ey  what’s  bis  condi- tion.
VVi.  A   Gamefler  both  waies.
VVi. Where  be  his  Spurres  ?
Ha.Hz.n2,  in  his  miftreffes  Peticote, for  which  hee  pa  wild His  Knight-hood  too, till  a   good  hand  redeeme  it.
He  will  talke  you  nothing  but  poftilions Embroideries  for  his  Coach,  and  Flanders  Mares  -*
What  feverall  lutes  for  the  twelue  dayes  at Chrifimas*
How  many  Ladies  dote  upon  his  phymomy:
That  hee  is  limited  but  a   hundred  pound A   month  for  diet,  which  will  fcarce  maintains  him In  Phefant  egges  an  Turkyforhis  motion.
Now  does  his  Barge  attend  him,  if  he  came By  water,  but  if  the  Dice  chance  to  runne  counter.
He  ftayes  till  twelue  in  anger,  devours  linoke,
And  defperately  will  (hoot  the  Bridge  at  midnight Without  a   waterman.
FF'.Thehoufe  fills  apace Whatare  thefeha  ?
Enter  a   Cottntrie  gentleman,  and  Little-flock?.
Ha.\  Countrie  gentleman, and  Little-ftocke .
VVi. A   Countrie  gentleman  ?   I   have  feene  him  fore Appeare  in  other  fhape,is  he  a   Chriftian  ?
Ha.  Why  ?   do  ft  thou  doubt  him  ?
JVi. Caufe  I   have  met  him  with  a   Turbant  once,
If  1   miftake  not,  but  his  linnen  was  not So  handfome  altogether  as  the  Turks*
F
In
The  Gamefter.
In  quirfd  with  a   Crab-tree  cudgell  too,
W alking  and  canting  broken  Dutch  for  farthings*
Ha, The  apparition  of  an  Angel!  once brought  him  to  this. fVt.Doll call  him  countrie  gentleman?
Ha.  His  generation  i   s   no t   k   no  w   ne  i’ th  T owne  9 You  fee  what  Dice  can  do, now  hee’s  admir’d.
Wl.Yor  what  I   prethee  ?
Ha  .For  talkingnon-ien£e,when  he  has  loft  his  mony You  fhall  meete  him  going  up  and  downe  the  ordinary
To  borrow  monie  upon  his  head. fVi.  His  head.
Will  he  goe  upon  his  head,  or  will  he  pawne  it?
Ate.Pawne  it  ,if  any  man  will  lend  him  mony  on’t>;
And  fayes  ;tis  good  iecuritie,  becaufe He  cannot  be  long  without  it,  they  fhall  have The  wit  for  the  nfe  too,  he  will  talke  defperatelfo And  fweare  he  is  the  father  ©f  all  the  Bulls Since  <sAdamy  if  all  faile  he  has  a   projed To  print  hisjefts.
JVk His  Bulls  you  meane,  .
~~~~  Ha.  Y’are  right,  ,
And  dedicate  ’em  to  the  Gamefters ,   yet  he  will  :
Seeme  wife  fometimes,  deliver  his  opinions As  on  the  Bench :   in  beeredie  utters  fentences.
And  after  Sacke  Philofophy.
wi. Let’s  not  be  troubl’d  with  him, who  are  thefe  ?
Yong  'Barnacle  ?
Enter  Nephew ,   and  Dwindle.
Will  you  indure  him.
Ha.  Y   es,and  the  Vineger-bottle  his  man  too  font  now  X   thinke on’t  he  fhall  excufe  me, He  loofe  no  time  ;   if  I   winne,  I   fhall haveleflfecaufeto  repent,  if  I   loofe,  by  thefe  hilts  i’le  make him  the  csufe  and  beate  him.
Enter  SeHawaj.  *
Are  they  at  play?
*SW,Deepe,deepe  Cjaraefiers.
^.Thenluke  with  a   hundred  peeces.
7f/'T’le  followjhow  now  Frank* ?   what  in  the  name  of  folly
is
The  Gamefter.
is  hce  reading  ?
Afc.Savc  you  gentlemen, fave  you  noble  gallants  2 May  a   man  loofe  any  monie  ?   1   honor ,   fir,  your  fhadow. «5W.Thi$  is  another  humor.
AV.Dee  here  the  newes  gentlemen  ? fP*.  What  newes  I   pray  ?
A7*. The  new  Curranto.
S   ^/.Good,flr,  impart.
Ne.  Be  there  no  more  gentlemen  to  heare  it
Here?’tisextraordmariefinc  newes,  in  blacke  and  white.
From  Terra  incoonita.
*   -
Wi.  Terra  incognita  ?
A7 ^.I5fir,the  quinteflence  of  the  World:  for  our  foure  parts Europe,  Aft  a,  Affric£>ey  and  America,  are  as  the  foure Elements,  and  this, as  the  learned  Geographers  fay, is Like  ,a  fift  effenceor  quinteflence  of  the  World ^:.Pray,Sir,wbat  ne  wes  from  this  quinteflence,  it  muft Needs  be  refin’d  novelties,
A/V.  From  Slavonia.
^’.That’s  no  part  of  Terra  incognita  jnz  know  that.
Aft.  But  you  doe  not  know  that  Slavonia  I   meane,  'tis Inhabited  by  a   Nation  without  a   head.
E>rei.  Without  a   head  in  ?   what  part  are  their  eyes? AV.Peace  ^Dwindle: a   curfed  kinde  of  people  that  have Neither  Law,  nor  Religion  but  for  their  o wne  purpofes  : Their  Country  is  fome  what  low,  and  open  to  ^the  Sea,
Sel.Do  they  not  feare  drowning?
AV.  They  are  fafeft  in  a   tempefl,  if  they  be  taken  at  any  time by  their  enemies, and  caft  over-bord,they  turne  other  creatures, fome  Rocks, fome  Sharkes,fome  Crocadiles,and  fo  retaine  part of  their  former  nature.
ivi. What  do  thofe  that  dwell  afhore*5 Ate.They  follow  their  worke, and  make  nets  not  only  to  catch Fiffobut  Townes  and  Provinces:  thej ewes Are  innocent  to  ’em,  and  the  Divell  a   dunce,  of  whofe Trade  they  are.
Sel.  A   dangerous  generation.
AWnPerwiggana  a   fruitful!  Country,  the  moone  fliincs All  day,  and  the  Sunne  at  night.
Sel.
The  G a   me  jit r*
Sel .   That’s  ftrange,
hee  has  a   morall  in’t  have  not  wee  gentlemen  that  fit  up  all night  a   drink  ing,and  go  to  bed  when  the  funne  rifes  ?
Ne.  In  this  Province  the  King  never  comes  out  ofhis  Palace.
VF'kWow  does  the  Court  remove  there?
iV^Whenhedoes  purpofe  to  change  the  aire  ,   heehasan Elephant  richly  trapped, that  carries  the  Court  upon  his  backe into  what  part  of-' the  Kingdome  he  pleafe.
mi  have  heard  of  Elephants,  that  have  carried  Cadies.
iVV.$nailes3Snailes  in  comparifomand  to  increafeyour  won* der  Ithis  bead  does  never  drinke.
Wi. I   would  be  loth  to  keepc  him  companie.
*5*  el.  How  then  ?
Ne.  Eate,eate  altogether,  and  what  nothing  but 'men,  and of  what  ranke  or  condition,  none  but  great  men  ,   and  the  fat- ted nobillitie,  but  like  your  good  Mom  fie  ur  hee  cares  for  no- thing but  the  head,  and  it  is  confidently  reported  hee  has devoured  more  heads,  within  this  three  lad  yeeres, then  thq- Elephant  wee  had  in  England  ate  Pennie  Loves  in  Pea- ven.
D   rv i   The  D   iv ell  choke  him  would  hee  had  London  Bridge inhisbeilie  too.
Nell he  fab/edls  of  the  great  Duke  of  Lubber-  land  ha’s  beene lately  in  rebellion.
fVi.l  am  forry  it  will  be  inconvenient  to  heare  out  your  Cur- ranto/I  am  weary  of  a   little  monie  when  that’s  lod  I   may bee  a   futor  for  the  red  of  your  newes,  and  fo  I   commend  mee to  all  your  friends  in  Lubber- Land.  Exit.
Ne. Dwindle i   didd  heare  this, now  could  I   be  angry.
Dwl.  Goe  to  play  then, fir, if  you  loofe  your  mouie,  you  may talke  roundly  to  'em  for  they  cannot  bee  founcivill  as  not  to give  loofers  leave  tofpeake.
iY^.But  if  I   winne.
cE)vel Why  then  you  may  be  drunke  to  night  and  iTe — the Cafter  to  you.
Enter  Little-fiocke^Mcre-lcffc*
Lit.\ curfe  upo.:  xhefe reding  Dice, that  lad  iiy  and  in
Was
7 be  Gamt(lerm
Was  out  ofmy  way  ten  peeces ;   canft  lend  me  any Monie,ho  w   have  the  cards  dealt  with  thee.
— •   I   defie  thee, if  my  Knight  recover  not I   muftbe  fober  to  morrow.
Lit. Oh,  for  a   hundred  and  all  made  now.
Enter  Sell-away.
Sel.  Yonders   winnes  tirannically,  without
Mercie,he  came  in  but  with  a   hundred  peeces.
Lit. I’Ve  get  a   fancy  prefently.
slcr.  And  how  thrive  the  bones  with  his  Lordihip
SelMis  Lordlhips  bones  are  not  well  fet  they  are  maliciouf- ly  bentagainft  him  they  will  runne  him  quite  out  of  all.
Enter  Ncphew,and  Dwindle .
iW.Moremony  Dwindle  c   all  my  Uncle*:  1   mu  ft  have  it, for my  honor  ,   two  hundred  peeces  more  Will  Jferve  my  turne  * in  the  meane  time  I   will  play  away  my  Cloke  and  fome  fu* perfluous  things  about  me.
Dwi.  By  that  time  you  are  come  to  your  fairt,I  fhall  bee here.
Sel,  Hee’s  blowne  up  too.  *   Exit .
Enter  Hazard,
i^.So,fo,the  Dice  in  two  or  three  fuch  nights  will  be  out  of my  debt, and  I   may  live  to  be  a   land-lord  agen.
<SV/.You  are  fortunes  minion  Mailer.
Ha.You  wodfeemetobe  no  foole,  becanfe  Hie  dote  s   not Up°n  you  gentlemen,Imufttakemy  chance  ;   ’twas A   lucky  hundred  pown’d  T acke  wilding.
Enter  Wilding  gnawing  a   *Boxc,
What  eating  the  Boxes.
Acr,  Let  us  in  agen.
^   ^.Chewing  th  7   cud  a   lithe,  I   have  loft  all  my  monie  Will Thou  haft  made  a   fortunate  night  on’t,  wot Play  no  more.
Ha.Tis  the  firft  time  I   had  the  grace  to  give  off  a   winner I   wonot  tempt  the  Dice.
iVi. What  haft  wonne  ?   •
Ha.You  doe  not  hears  mec  complaine J   have  not  been  fo  warms
This
F
3
7 be  Gamefter.
This  tennweekes.
Enter  Acre-lejfe, rvi Tis  froft  in  my  breeches.
Acr. Matter  Hazard:!  was  afraid  you  had  beene  gone,  there's a   frefti  Gamefier  come  in  with  his  pockets  full  of  Gold;  he dazeles  the  Gamefiers,  and  no  man  has  flocke  to  play  with him.
fVi.  What  is  lie  ?
$Acr.  A   Merchant  he  feemes ;   he  may  be  worth  your  retire- Ks.Not  for  the  Exchange  to  night,!  am  refolv’d.
.Temptation  /now  have  I   an  infinite  itch  to  this  Merchants peeces.
Ha .   If  thou  wot  have  any  monie,
Speake  before  I   launch  out,  and  command  it Wi.  A   hundred  peeces.
Ha. Call  to  the  Matter  o’th  houfe  by  this  token — -thou  wet venture  agen  then?
Wi. They  may  prove  as  luckie  as  thine — but  whatdolfor- ' get? the  wench ,   the  fairy  at  home, that  expe&s  me.
Ha. I   had  forgot  too,  you  wonot  play  now- ^Fi.Tisnow  upon  the  time.
Ha.  By  any  meanes^goe.
#>\Hum,I  ha  loft  my  monie,and  may  recover  a   prety  wench, which  hand  ?   her  ecovetoufnes, this  letchery^monie  is  the  hea- vier.#'///, doft  heare?iTe  requite  thy  curtefic.  Thou  haft  lent me  a   hundred  pownd,  iTe  pay  thee  agen ,   and  thou  that  have for  the  ufe,the  flefh  device  at  homejthat  expedds,  thoufliat  fup« ply  my  place  Will.
Ha.  You  wonot  loofe  this  opportunitie ,   and  fooleyour felfe.  Exit .   Acre.
wi.l am  refolv’d ; five  hundred  peeces  fay  i   le  come  to  him, youlove  thefport  as  well  asT.to  morrow  you  {hall  thanke  me for’t;be  fecret ,   fhee’le  never  know  thee,  for  our  conditions are  to — Neither  light  nor — and  The  muft  needs  conceive tis  I.
Ha.  Are  you  in  earned?
wi.  Have  you  wit  to  apprehend  the  curtefie  ?
Let  me  alonc-the  wench,  and  I   fhall  meete Hereafter  and  be  merry,  here’s  my  Key
The
The  Gamefler.
The  Merchants  monie  cooks  dway  •:  be  wife And  keepe  conditions  toufe  her  as  thypleafiire,
There  will  be  enough  for  me :   nay  no  derriurres. You  have  not  loft  your  ftomackcto  this  game How  ere  I   fpeed  to  night,  Wee’le  laugh  to  morrow How  the  poore  wench  was  cofelfd.
Ha.  But  wouldft  ha  mee  goe?
Wi. I   wod  ha  thee  ride  boy  ,   I   muft  to  the  Gamefier Tarewell,remembernot  tofpeake  a   word,  but Kiife  and  embrace  thy  belly  foil.
Ha.  If  i   do  not.
The  puniihment  of  an  Eunuch  light  upon  me,
AcUIII.
Enter  Hazard'  and  Wilding,
r   wf.How  now  will,  thou  lookft  defperatly  this  morning Didftfleepewell to  night?
Ha: Yes  ,   #tis  very  like I   went  to  fleepe ;   but  fuch  a   bed-fellow/ f^i.What  ailes  ftie  5   was  ihe  dull?
Ha. Do  not  enquire
But  curfe  your  felfe  till  noone,  lam  charitable I   do  not  bid  thee  hange  thy  felfe, and  yet I   have  caufe  to  thanke  thee,  I   would  not  have  loft The  turne,for  all  the  monie  I   wonne  laft  night  J4f%,
Such  a   delicious  thieft, f^i.Ithinke  ib.
Ha  J   found  it  fo  and  dare  make  my  affidavit,
Wi  .Thou  didft  not  fee  her?
^.Norfpeaketoher,  to  what  purpofe.
Shee  was  fo  handfome  i’th  darke,  you  know  /
My  meaning,  had  beene  pittie  any  light Or  voyce  ihould  interrupt  us ,
?ri.Now  doe  I Grow  melancholy.
Ha.  If  thou  do’ft  envie  mee There  is  feme  jreafon  for’tghou  do’ft  imagine
t
,   7 'be  Gamejlef.
X   have  had  pleafurein  my  dayes ,   but  never,
Never, ib  fweete  a skirmifh,  how  like  fty Slice  grew  to  my  embraces,  not  a   kiffe But  had  Elifium  in't.
JVi.  I   was  a   rafcall.
Ha.  If  thou  didd  know  but  halfe  fo  much  as  I Or  couldd  imagine  it,  thou  wouldft  acknowledge Thy  lelfe  worfe  then  a   rafcall  on  Record.
I   have  not  words  toexpreife,how  foft,how  bountious Howeveriethingaman  with  fulfdefires Could  witli  a   Lady,  do  notquedion  mee Further  ;tis  too  much  happines  to  remember I   am  forry  I   have  faid  fo  much. mWasnotl  curd
To  loofe  my  monie,  and  fuch  delicate  fport?
Ha. But  that  I   love  thee  well  fhud’ft  nere  injoy  her.
Wi.  Why?
Ha.  I   would  a   1   mo  ft  cut  thy  throate.
^/.Youwodnot.  ^
Ha,  But  take  her,  and  if  thou  part’d  with  her  ,   one  night more  for  leffe  then  both  the  Indies  thou’t  loofe  by  her,  fhec has  paid  me  for  my  fervice,  I   aske  nothing  elfe.
Wi. If  lire  be  fuch  aprecious  armefull  Will I   think e   you  may  be  fatisfied.
Ha.  Take  heede,
And  underhand  thy  felfe  a   little  better  :
I   thinke  you  may  be  fatisfied  with  what  ?
A   handfome  wench  ’tis  herefie  recant  it I   never  fhail  be  fatisfied.
Wl Y   ou  do  not  pur  pofe.
Purpofc  a   new  incounter.
Ha. For  thy  fake
Tis  podible  I   may  not, I   wouldhavc My  game  kept  for  me  ;   what  I   have  done .   Was  upon  your  entreatie,  if  you  have The  like  occafion  hereafter  I Should  have  a   hard  heart  to  deny  thee  J acke.
VVi.  Thouhad  fir’d  my  blood,  that  I   could  call  backe  time. And  be  poffeft  of  what  my  indiferetion
Give
The  Game  fief.
Gave  up  to  thy  enjoying,  but  I   am  comforted.
She  thinks ’t was  I,  and  we  hereafter  may Be  free  in  our  delightsmow,  fir,  the  nevves With  you  ?   Enter  Page.
/Yt.Mymiftrefle  did  command  my  diligence To  find  you  out  and  pray  you  come  to  fpeake  with  her.
Wi. When  I   am  at  leafure.
PaJXis  ofconfequencc,
Sheelayes,  and  much  concerncs  you,
Wi.  Is  Penelope With  her  f
Pa.  Not  when  Hie  fentmee  forth.
Wi.Let  her  expeft;  waite  you  on  me.
Ha.l  fpie  my  bluftering  Gamefter.
W/.The  yonger  ferret.
Ha.  I   care  not  if  I   allow  thee  a   fit  of  mirth  ,
But  your  boy  mud  be  in  comfort.
Enter  Nephew  and  ‘Dwindle.
Dwi.  Prayer, do  not  behave  your  felfe  fo  furiouflie, Y our  breath  is  able  to  blow  downe  a   houfe,  fir.
Ne.Uy  (Jncle  fhall  build  ’em  up  againe,oh  Dwindle , Thou  do  ft  not  know  what  honor  Yis  to  bee So  boifterous,  I   would  take  the  wall  now Of  my  LordMaiors  Gy  ants.
Wi.Doc  as  Ibid  you,  firra.
Prf.AlaSjfi^hec’le  devourc  me.
Ha. He  flianot  hurt  thee.
P^.Be  at  my  backe  then  pray,fir,now  I   thinke  on’t I   have  the  beard  here  too  with  which  I   frighted Our  maides  la  ft  night.
D wi. You  know  thefe  gentlemen.
Ne. Hazard,  and  Wilding  how  i’ll?  how  i’ft  Bnlchins > Wo’d  ye  had  bccne  with  us ;   I   ha  fo  maid  a   Captains OYh  traine  band  yonder.
P^.Isnot  your  name  'Barnacle  }
Ha.  Ancient  Petarre  ?   -
Ne.  What’s  this?
Wi.  The  admiration  of  the  Towne, "
G
7 he  Ganitfter.
AV,  For  what }
fVi.  For  valour.
ito.This  inch  and  a   halfc  ?
fvi. Ther’s  the  wonder ,   oh  the  fpirit,  the  tall  fpirk Within  him  he  has  the  foule  of  a   Giant.
He.  He  has  but  a   dwarfs  body  3   ancient  Tetarre.
Pa. Sirra,  how  dare  you  name  a   Captaine  f Thou  tunne  of  ign  3rance,he  fhall  eate  my  Piftoll*
And  fave  me  the  difeharge.
AV.Tell  me  of  a   tunfrle  drinke  twenty  tunnes  to’ thy Health, who  fhall  hinder  me  if  I   have  a Minde too* t, your  Piftol’s  a   Pepper-corne,  I   will  eate Up  an  armory ,if  my  ftomacke  ferve ,   folong  as  I Have  mony  to  pay  for’t,  and  you  were  as  little  agen As  you are:fright  me  with  your  petguns,  my  name’s 'Barnacle $\x,oA\  me  what  you  pleafe  ,   and  my Mans  name’s  Dwindle  j and  you  goe  there  to,  do  not Thinke  but  I   have  feene  fire-Dakes  afore  now  though I   never  talk’d  on’t,and  Rackets  too,though  my  man Be  a   Coxcombehere,and balls  of  wild-fire5no  dilpraife To  you ;   d’ee  thinke  to  thunder  me  with  your  Picke Tooth  by  your  fide  ?
Pa.  Let  my  fword  fhew  him  but  one  flafh  of  lightning To  finge  the  haire  of  his  head  off.
H^.Good  ancient  Petarre.
Dwi. Tis  a   very  divell  in  dechno  fex to: Peter  d’ec.call  him  ?-
P .? /Thou  dogbolt  and  cozen  germane  to  Cerberus.
Ha. Two  heads  once  remov’d,hee’s  fomewhat  like  him.
A7<f.I  begin  to  thinke.
Dwi. And  I   begin  to  — * — — -
Pa.  Agen.
?^i.He  does  but  thinke.
Pa.Wz  thinke  ?   is  this  a   place  for  him  to  thinke  in  ? Minotaure,vanifh  immediately ,or  I   will  fhoot  death From  my  Muftachiosand  kill  thee  like  a   Porcupine.
He.  Ancient  Petarre ,1  know  thy  name,and  I Honor  it/har’t  one  of  the  mo  ft  vaineglorious Peeces  of  fire-worke  that  ever  water  wet.  I   am  a Gentleman^nd  if  I   have  fay’d  any  thing  to  difguft
The  Gameftef.
Thec,I  can  askc  thee  forgivenes,  as  well  as  the Proudeft  vaflfell  on ’em  all,  extend  thy  paw,  thou Invincible  Epitome  of  Hercules y and  let  thy  fervant  - KifTe  it.
Wf.Come  pray , fir 5be  reconcil’d  ;   he  fubmits.
Pa.I  fee  thou  haft  fomething  in  thee  of  a   Soldier,  to  no  Pur- pofe,andI  will  cherifhit.  Thou  art  a   raskall  in  thy  under- ltanding,  thcru  (hat excufe  me,7#r%,in  honorable  love  :   I   re- member thy  great  grand-Father  was  hang’d  for  robbing  a   Ped- ler-woman  of  fixe  yards  of  inckle,  and  thou  may  ft,  (   manger the  Herald  )   in  a   right  line,  challenge  the  gallowesby  his copie;  mongrel  1   ofmongrell  Hall,  I   am  thy  humble  fervant, and  will  cut  the  throate  of  any  man  that  Fayes  thou  haft  ey- ther  wit  or  honefty  more  then  is  fit  for  a   gentleman. Command my  fword,  my  lungs,  my  life,  thouart  a   pufte,a  malligrube,a Metaphyficall  Coxcombc  ,   and  I   honour  you  with  all  my hart.
AV.Ithanke  you  noble  ancient, and  kinde  gentlemen.
Come  Dwindle ,   wee’le  go  rore  fome where  elfe.
^i.Was  everfiich  an  offe?  Exita
Ha.  The  boy  aid  hit  his  humour  excellently.
Fere,  cherifhthy  wit.
P ^.Now  fhall  I   tell  my  miftrefle  you’le  come  to  her  ?
VFi.  How  officious  you  are  for  your  miftreffe,  firra?
What  faid  fhee  I   came  not  home  all  night  ?
/^.Nothing  to  me ;   but  my  eyes  ne’re  beheld Her  looke  more  pleafantly.
Ha.Now  farewell  J ack*]L  needs  not  urge  your  fecrefie Touching  your  miftre  ,   I   have  mounted  for  you  :
Only  i*le  caution  you, looke  when  you  me:te 1   hat  you  performe  your  bufineshandfomely .
I   ha  begun  fo  well  fhee  may  fufped  elfe,
And  put  thee  out  of  fervice,  if  fhee  doe.
You  know  your  wages,  I   fhall  laugh  at  thee,
And  hartilie ;   fo  farewell,  farewell  J   ache.  Exit .
F0.1o  fay  the  truth  I   have  fhewed  my  felfe  a   coxcombc.
A   pox  a   play  that  made  me  double  loofer. for  ought  1   know,fhe  may  admit  me  never fofucha  turneagen,  and  then  I   ha  punifhed
G   a   >ty
The  Gamfttr.
My  fdfe  irigcniouflie.
'Enter  Miliris  V/iUmgfPenelope  ,and  MiflrU  Leonora? a   Servant  waiting  upon  them.
My  wife.
Pag.  My  Miftrefle,  fir.
JT/'.Keepe  you  at  di fiance,  'Penelope, and  Leonora*
Slice's  as  the  boy  reported  fomething  more.
Plealant  then  ordinarie.
MiX\s  hee  good  cozen,
Pretend  fome  bufines,  offer  at  fome  wares,
Or  aske  the  Gold-fmith  what  your  Diamond’s  worth Something  to  trifle  time  away  ,   while  I Speak e   with  my  husband  a   few  words.
JF/.Shee  comes  toward  me.
Mi.  I   can  containe  no  longer?
How  d’ee  fwcete-hart  ?
FfthWell,  but  a   little  melancholy.
You  looke  more  fprightfully  wife,  fomething  h^s  pleas’d  y Mi Jt  has  indeede,  andifit  be  no  ftaine To  modeftie,!  would  enquire  how  you Sped  the  la  ft  night. wi. I   loft  my  money.
Mi\  doe  not  meane  that  game. jvi.l  am  not  betrai’d  I   hope -do  not  meane  that  game? MiY’area  fine  gentleman.
JVi. Tis  fo,could  fhe  not  keepe  her  owne  counfell  ?
Mi. And  have  behav’d  your  felfemoft  wittilie,
And  I   may  fay  mo  ft  wrongfully :   this  will Bee  much  for  your  honor /w  hen ’tis  knowne.
TFJ.What  w   ill  be  knowne  >
Mi. Do  you  not  blufh  ?   oh  fie.
Is  there  no  modeftie  in  man  ?
W*.  What  riddle
Have  you  got  now  ?   Iwonotyet  feeme  confcioug.
Mi.  T is  time  then  to  be  plaine,  it  was  a   wonder I   could  be  fo  long  filent,  did  you  like Your  laftmights  lodging  ?
^//,Very,vcry  well ;
7   he  Gamtfter*
1   went  not  to  bed  all  night. r   Mi'You  did  not  lie  with Miftrefle  Pcnefopem ykinfwoman  ?
JVi.  Refufe  me  if  I   did.
CMi.Yon  neede  not  fweare  ;
But ’t was  mo  Fault  of  yours,  no  fault  no  venue  : But  ’t is  no  place  to  expoftulate  tliefe  adlions. Inbreifeknow  ’twas  myplott ,   for  I   obferv’d Which  way  your  warme  affection  mov’d; &   wrought So  with  my  honeft  cozen  to  fupplie Her  wanton  place,  that  with  fome  fhame  at  laft ,
I   might  deceive  your  hard  heart  into  kindnes.
^'.Thatjthat  agen  fweete  wife,  and  be  a   little Serious;  was  it  your  plott  to  excufe  your  cozen. And  be  the  bed- fellow  ?
Mi.  Heaven  .knowes  ’tis  tru  th.
TVi.l  am  fitted,  fitted  with  a   paire  of  homes Of  my  owne  making.
^i.Thanke,and  thinke  upon That  providence  that  would  not  have  you  loft In  fuch  a   Forreft  of  loofe  thoughts ,   and  bee  - Yourfelfeagen  ;I  am  your  hand-maid  ft  ill,
And  have  learned  fo  much  pietie  to  conceale Whatever  fhould  dishonor you. fVi.  It  budds,
Itbuddsalreadie.  I   fhall  turne  ftarke  mad,.  ~
Horne  mad.
wd/i.Whatailc  you  Pare  you  vext  became Your  wantonneffe  thriv’d  fo  well  ?
WK Well  with  a   vengance.
MIX  did  expedt  your  thanks.
*F>.Yes,I  do  thankcyou,thankeyou  heartilier.
Moft  infinitly  thanke  you.
-diz.Doth  this  merit
No  other  payment  but  your  fcorne,  then  know Bad  man, ’tis  in  my  power  to  be  reveng’d.
And  what  I   had  a   refolution
Should  fieepe  in  silent  darkaes,  now  (hall  lookc
Day  in  the  face,  i’le  publifh  to  the  World
9   3
How
7   he  Gamefier .
Howl  am  wrong’d, and  with  what  ftubborneffe You  have  defpis’d  the  cure  of  your  owne  fam^  5 Nor  (hall  my  Cozen  fuffer  in  her  honor.
I   ftoope  as  low  as  earth  to  Hie  w   my  dutie.
But  tco  much  trampl’d  on  I   rife  to  tell The  World  I   am  a   woman.
VFi. No,no  ;   harke  you,
I   doe  not  mocke  you ,   I   am  taken  with
The  conceit,  what  a   fine  thing  I   have  made  my  felfe.
Nere  fpeake  on’t,thy  device  (Ball  take;  i’le  love  thee, .And  kifle  thee  for’^tha’ft  paid  me  handfomclie:
An  admirable  plot,  and  follow’d  cunninglie.
Pie  fee  thee  anon  agen,  and  lie  with  thee To  night, without  a   flratagemme.  The  gentlewomen Expert  thee ;   keepe  all  clofe,deare  wife, no  fentences.
I   am  trick’d  and  trim’dat  my  owne  charges  rarely.
Pie  feeke  out  fo me  body  agen.  Exit,
Mil  have  prefum’d  too  much  upon  your  patience,
I   have  difeover’d, and  I   hope  t*  will  take.
Penel  with  it  may.
Mi. You  are  fad  dill,  Leonova.
Remove  thefe  thoughts :   come  i’le  waite  on  you  now To  the  Exchange :   forne  toyes  may  there  ftrike  off Their  fad  remembrance.
Leo .   [attend you.
Mi.  Farewell.
Enter  Beaumontyand  his  keeper,
AYThe  gentleman  that  was  ydterday  to  fpeake  with  y Is  come  againe  to  vifite  you.
Beo.  S   .Richard  Hurry}
AYThe  fame,  fir. iW.Youmay  admit  him.
AYjyfetl  of  his  quality Dofeldoms  court  afflirtion,  this,  I   mild Allow, is  a   mod  noble  gratitude For  thofe  good  offices  my  father  did  him.
Enter  S   .   Richard ,
Blu.Sir,  the  refperts  I   owe  you  make  me  againe Sollicker  for  your  faftie,  and  although
The  G ame fief.
On  the  fir  ft  proportion  it  appears Strange  to  you,  and  perhapps  incredible,
Which  might  dlfpofe  you  to  the  (low  embrace 0(  what  I   tendred  ,   yet  againe  brought  to  you After  a   time  to  examine  and  confidcr Whatmoft  concernesyou,  lam  confident,
You  will  accept ,   and  thanke  me.
Beo.  Noble  fir.
You  doe  expreffe  forare  abountie,  men Willftoely  imitate  ;   I   am  not  foe Loft  in  my  wilde  misfortune,  but  my  teafon Will  guide  me  to  acknowledge  and  paie  backe Myfervice  and  my  felfe,  for  fo  much  charity Asyouhave pleal’d  to  fhew  me,
Enter  VioUnte .
^.Here’s  for  thy  paines:they  arc  the  fame  ;   make  good Thy  word, and  place  me  where  I   may  unfeene Heare  their  difeourfe.
Ke .   This  way.
Beo.  But  with  your  pardon,
I   would  defire  to  heare  agen  how  much I   fhall  be  oblig’d  that  knowing  the  extent Of  your  defert  I   tnaie  pay  backe  a   duty.
That  may  in  every  circumftance  become My  fortune  and  the  benefit.
H#.Then  thus.-youare  a   Prifoner ;   that  alone Is  mifery.
But  yours  the  greater,  in  that  guilt  ofblood.
Not  furnmes  that  may  bee  recompencvd,detaine  you.
ITe  not  difpute  the  circumftancc,  DeUmore Slaine  by  your  hand.
Beo.  I   have  confeft.
The  firft  jurie  having  found  it  murder.
##.His  blood  calls  to  the  law  for  juftice,and  you  cannot Left  to  your  felfe ,   and  looking  on  the  fad,
Exped  with  any  comfort  what  muft  follow.
Yet  I   in  pity  of  your  fuftrings,
In  pity  of  your  youth  which  would  bee  elfc Untimely  blafted,ofkr  to  remove
Your
fbt  Gmefist.
Your  fovrowes,make  you  free  and  right  againc,
With  clccre  fatfrfa&ion  to  the  Law.
*Beom  Good,  fir,
Pr3y  give  me  leave  to  doubt  here.  I   fee  not How  ere  your  will  and  charit'e  may  bee  adtivc In  my  deflreffe  to  five  me,  that  you  can A(I ure  my  life  and  frcedome  ,   fince  in  caufes Of  filch  high  nature, lawes  mud  have  their  courfe  ? Whofe  ftreame  as  it  were  wickednelfc  to  pollute,
It  were  vanitie  for  any  private  man To  thinke  be  could  refill.  I   fpeake  not  this To  have  you  imagine  I   defpife  my  life,
But  to  expreffe  my  feares  your  will  does  flatter  ybu Bovewhat  your  power  can  reach, or  that  I   urge  not
My  beeing  a   Commiflioncr  alone
To  doe  you  fervice,  I   have  friends  in  Court,
And  great  ones,  when  the  rigor  of  the  Law Hath  fentenc’d  you  to  mediate  your  pardon :
Nor  takes  it  from  the  juilice  of  a   Prince,
Where  provocation  and  not  malice  makes Guilty, to  fave,  whom  the  fharpe  letter  doomes Sometimes  to  execution :   I   am  to  farre From  doubting  your  difeharge ,   that  I   dare  forfeit My  life  if  I   fccure  not  yours  from  any Danger  for  this  offence.  *
Beo.  You  fpeake  all  comfort Which  way  can  1   deferve  this  ?
/Ai.That  i’le  fliew  you.
I   had  an  obligation  to  your  father
Whofe  love  when  all  my  fortunes  were  i*ch  ebbe,
And  defperatelie  ,   releev’dmee  with  large  fummes-
By  whofe  carcfull  manage  I   arryu’d  at  what
I   am,  and  I   iliould  be  a   rebell  to
Nature  and  goodneffe  not  to  love  the  fonne
Offuch  a   friend  by  his  misfortune  made
Ripe  for  my  gratitude.
Beo  You  fpeake  your  bountie.
But  teach  not  all  this  while  how  to  deferve  it.
The  Game  ft  er.
Ph.  Tis  done  by  your  acceptance  of my  daughter To  bee  your  Bride.
Be.  To  be  my  Bride  ?   pray  tell  tell  me Is  (he  deform’d  or  wanton,  what  vice  has  fhee  ?
H*.Vice,  hr,  Hie  will  deferve  as  good  a   husband, Shec  i>  handfomc  though  I   fay’t,  and  fhall  be  rich  too.
Beo.Shcc  is  too  good, if  Che  be  faire  or  vertuous. Pardon, I   know  Hie  is  both :   but  you  amaze  me,
I   did  exped  conditions  of  danger :
A   good  wife  is  a   blciTing  above  health  ;
You  teach  mee  to  deferve  my  life  fir  ft  from  you By  offering  a   happmeffc  beyond  it.
Ph*.  If  you  finde  love  to  accept,  ’tis  the  reward I   lookefor,Z>0«<rtv*  fhall  obey Or  quit  a   father.
Be,  Ha  goodnefie  defend.
I   know  you  dcebutmockc  me,  and  upbraid My  add,  that  kild  her  fervant  -   wound  mee  (till,
I   have  deferv’d  her  curfe  :   I   fee  her  weepe,
And  every  tearc  accufe  me.
PuMzy  I   never
Thrive  in  my  Prayers  to  Heaven,  if  what  I   offer  - I   wifhnot  heartilic  confirm’d.
2 1u.  I   now
Sufpcsft:  you  are  not  Leonora  father,
’Twere  better  you  disenabled,  then  made  her So  paft  all  hope  of  beemg  cur’d  agen  s I   marry  Leonora  !   can  her  foule Thinke  on  fo  foule  a   rape,  {he  cannot  fure.
#4.  Shee  (hall  ;   I   command.
Be.  By  vertue  ,   but
Shee  fhanot,  norwould-I  to  grafpe  an  Empire Tempt  her  to  fo  much  ftaine,let  her  tell  downe Her  Virgin  teares,on  Delamores  cold  Marble,
Sigh  to  his  duff:,  and  call  revenge  upon
His  head  whole  anger' lent  him  to  thofe  fhades,
Prom  whence  fhenere  muftiechim;  this  will  juftifie
Shee  lov’d  the  dead  :   it  were  impietie
One  finile  fhould  blefle  her  murderer ,   and  how  ere
H
7   he  Gpwejler •
You  are  pleas’d  to  complement  with  my  afdidion,
I   know  fhe  cannot  tinde  one  thought  without  her So  foule  to  looke  upon  me.  .
Eh .   Let  it  red  on  that,  will  you  confent  and  timely  maiic
provision  for  your  faftieV 'Leo, For  my  life
You  meane5now  on  the  chance,  then  I   may  live You  are  confident,and  thinke  it  not  impoffible Your  daughter  mayaffcd  me  other’s  at  once.
Two  bleJlings,  are  they  not  andmightieones,
Cbnfidering  what  I   am,  how  low,  how  loft T'otkxommon  aire?
Hu. Now  you  are  wife.
72eo.  But  if
Your  daughter  would  confirme  this,  and  propound Her  felfe  my  vidorie.
Eh.  What  then  ?
Beo% I   fl'ieuld  condemne  her, and  defpife  the  conquetb Thefe  things  may  bribe  an  Atheifl  not  a   Lover.
But  you  perhaps  are  ignorant,  1   have  given My  filth  away  irrevocable  ,   *tis Ti  e   wealth  ot  Violante ,   and  I   wonct Bafely  fteale  ba eke  a   thought, and  yet  I   thanke  you,
I   am  not  fo  inhumane.
Eh.  WLl  you  not Preferre  your  life To  honor  and  religion  ?
Beo.  For  fhamebe  filent  could  you  make  me  Lord '   Ofmyowtie  deljiny ,   and  that  Leonora Had  empires  for  her  dower,  and  courted  mee With  all  the  fatter  ies  oflife  ,   to  quit My  vowesto  Vtolante,  I   would  tlie LIpon  her  bofome  to  meete  death.
Hu.  And  death
You  muftexped  which  will  take  off  this  braverie.
Beo.  And  I   will  kifleit,  kiffeit,like  a   Bride.
Eh.  Sorcfolute  ?
2fc?.And  if  I   cannot  live My  Viol anta9  I   will  die  her  jfacrifice.
The  Camefter.
Good  fir, no  more,  you  do  not  well  to  trouble The  quiet  of  a   Prifoner  thus,  that  cannot Be  a   too  carefull  Steward  ofthofe  minuts Left  him  to  make  his  peace,  tempt ^me  no  furthers The  Earth  is  not  fo  fixtas  iny  refo^ues.
Rather  to  die  then  in  one  thought  tranfplant My  love  from  Violante .
AW.Bee  undone.
And  this  contempt?  fhall  ba  ften  the  divorce Offoule  and  love,  die  and  be  foone  forgotten.  Exit .
Enter  Viol  ante,  ,
Beo.  My  Viol  ante  there  can  be  any  joy Neighbour  too  fo  much  greife,  i’lepowre  it  out  - To  pay  thy  bounteous  vifit,  if  my  eyes Admit  no  follow fhip  in  weeping, ’tis Becaufemy  heart  which  faw  thee  firft,  would  bid Thee  welcome  thither,  (corning  to  acknowledge There  can  be  any  thing  but  joy  where  thou  art.
F^.Butfadnesmy  deere  Beaumont  yvjh\\e  there  is A   caufe  that  maks  thee  Prifoner,  Imuftweepe And  empty  many  fprings,my  eyes  are  now No  prophets  of  thy  forrow  but  the  witne?,
And  when  I   thinke  of  death  that  waits  upon  thee I   withertoaGhoft.
Beo.  Why  Vtolante ,
We  muft  all  die,reftraine  thefe  weeping  Fountaines,
Keepe  ’em  till  I   am  dead ,   difpence  ’em  then Upon  my  grave,  and  1   fhall  grow  agen,
And  in  the  fweete  difguife  of  a   faire  Garden Salute  the  fprisag  that  gave  mee  greene  and  odour.
Why  fhould  not  love  transforme  us?
Vio.  Bee  not  loft In  thefe  ima  ginations.
Beo.  Orperhapps
Th  aft  ambition,fHe  whofelove  made  up A   wonder  to  the  World .befide  the  pledge Of  duty  to  her  Lord,  fam’d  <» Arthemifia Shall  bee  no  more  in  ftorie  for  her  Tombe:
For  on  the  Earth  that  weighes  my  body  downe
H   2   When
The  Gamefter*
When  T   am  deadly  tearesby  the  cold  breath.
Of  Heaven  congeal’d  to  Beaumonts  memorie.
Shall  raife  a   monument  of  Pearle  to  out  doe The  great  Maufolus  Sepulcher.
Vio.  No  more
Of  this  vaine  language, if  you  have  any  pittis On  the  poore  Viola vte.
Ber,  I   ha  done.
And  yet  1   am  going  now  to  a   long  filence  ;
Allow  my  lorrow  to  take  leave  Violante Vio. It  fhall  be  fo,be  valiant  my  heart 4 Beaumont  I   come  not  to  take  leave  of  thee. Af.Perhappsyou’lefee  me  agen.
Vio.  Agen  and  often,
Thy  ftarres  are  gentle  to  thee, many  dales.
And  yeeres  are  yet  betweene  thee  and  that  time That  threatens  lode  of  breath;  fee, I   can  thus Difperfe  the  Clouds  fateheavie  on  my  brow,
Wipe  the  moi dure  hence,  tis  day  agen- Take  beames  into  thy  eye, and  let  them  finkc Upon  thy  better  fortune,  live,  livehappilie,
Be.ls  t>el,more  alive  ?
Vio. Dead  and  interr’d.
Be.Yrom  what  can  this  hope  rife  ?
Vio. From  thy  felfe  Beaumont  •
If  thou  wilt  fave  thy  felfe,  I   have  heard  all.
And  by  the  duty  of  my  love  am  bound
To  bide  your  refolution,  can  you  be
So  merciles  to  your  felfe  to  refufe  life
When  it  is  offer’d  with  the  bed  advantage
Js  Leonoras  love  ?   a   price  that  fhould
Buy  you  from  all  the  World  ?   be  counfell’d  fir,
Oh, do  not  loofe  your  felfe  in  a   vainepaffion Tor  thought  of  me, I   cancell  all  your  vow'es.
And  give  youbacke  your  heart,  bee  free  againe If  you  willpromife  me  to  live  and  love.
Be.  Leonora.
y^.That  bed  of woman-kinde,  a   mine  of  fweetnes. Be.  But  can  you  leave  mee  then  ?
7 he  Gamtfler ,
Vio.1  juftifie  ^
Thy  choice  of  me  in  that,  that  to  preferve  thee Dare  give  thee  backc  agen,be  Leonoras,
Tor  being  mine  th’art  loft  to  all  the  W orld
Better  a   thoufand  times,  thou  be  made  hers
Then  we  both  loofe,i’le  pawne  my  faith  fhaele  love  thee
Tie  be  content  to  heare  my  Beaumonts  well  .
And  vifite  thee  fometimes  like  a   glad  fifter,
And  never  beg  a   kilfe,but  if  I   weepe At  any  time  when  we  are  together.
Do  not  beleeve  ’tis  forrow  makes  mv  eyes So  wet, but' joy  to  fee  my  Beaumont  living  :
As  it  is  now  to  hope.
Be.  If  thou  doft  meanc  thus  '
Thou  doft  the  more  to  inflame  me  to  be  conftant.
Be  not  a   miracle  and  I   may  be  tempted To  love  my  life  above  thee, by  thi s   kifle.
Oh,  give  me  but  another  in  my  death Jtwill  reftore  me  by  this  innocent  hand.
While  as  I   with  my  foule  I   wonot  leave  the$
Tgr  the  Worlds  Kingdome.
Fio.B ut  you  mufljUnleffc You  change  for  Leonora ,   thinke  of  that,
Thinke  ere  you  be  torafli.
Be.  I’le  thinke  of  thee.
And  honor  to  be  read ,   I   love  Violante But  never  cotild  deferve  her  Jive  thou  happic.
And  by  thy  vertue  teach  a   neerer  way
To  heaven ,   we  may  mcete  yonder,  do  not  make  me
More  miferable  then  T   am, by  adding  per jurie
To  my  bloody  finne,  the  memory  of  thee
Will  at  my  execution  advance
My  fpirit  to  a     —   that  men  fhall  thinke
I   have  chang’d  my  caufe  for  martyrdoms Vto. Then  here
As  of  a   dying  man  I   take  my  leave.
Tare  well  unhap  pie  i’le  pray  for  thee,
Beo.Tis  poffible  I   may  live  yet  and  be  thine,
Vto. Thefc  teares  embalme  thee
H   3
7 he  Gamefter*
If  in  this  World  we  never  meetc My  life  is  buried  in  thy  winding  fheete.1 Eeo.Vdxs  exceeds  all  my  forrow.
            ..  ..  _
ha.  v.
Enter  Wilding.
Wi I   am  j'uftly  punilVd  now  for  all  m y   tricks,
And  pride  o’th  fiefti,  I   had  ambition To  make  men  cuckolds,  now  the  divell  hks  paid  mes Paid  me  i’th  lame  coine,and  Pic  compare My  forehead  with  the  broadeft  of  my  neighbor!*
But  ere  it  fpreads  too  monftrous,  I   rnuft  have Some  plot  upon  this  Hazard,  he  foppofes He  has  enjoy’d  Eenelope,  and  my  tricke To  drive  the  opinion  home,  to  get  him  marrie  her And  make  her  latisfadion  :   the  wench Has  oft  commended  him, he  may  be  wonne  tooT,
I   never  meant  to  part  with  all  her  portion.
Perhaps  heele  thanke  me  for  the  moytie.
And  this  difpos’d  on  fhee’s  conjur’d  to  filence.
It  muft  bee  fb.
Enter  Hazard,
Ha,  ]acJ^e  Wilding  how  iftman  ?
How  goes  the  Plough  at  home?  what  fayes  the  Lady Gmnever  that  was  humbled  in  your  abience  ?
You  have  the  credit  with  her ,   all  the  glorie Of  my  nights  worke;  does  iliee  nothide  her  eyes, Andblufh,  and  cry  you  are  a   fine  gentleman.
Turnea  tofide,  or  drop  a   handkercher.
And  ftoope,  and  take  occafion  to  lecre,
And  laugh  upon  thee  ?
Wi.  Nothing  letTe,i  know  not What  tha’ft  done  to  her,  but  fhees  very  fad.
Ha.  Sad ;   i*Ie  be  bang’d  then.
Wi, Thou  muft  imagine I   did  the  beft  to  comfort  her.
//^.Shee’s  melancholy
lor
The  Gamefi'er.
Tor  my  afcfence  man,i'le  keepebcr  company Agen  to  night.
rriMiec thinks  ’twas  I   enjoy’d  her.
#4.  Let  her  thinke  whom  flhe  willfo  We  may~couple, W'.And  nothing  now  but  fighes,  and  cries  I   have Undone  her.
Ha.Sbcc s   a   foole,I  hurt  her  not, Sheecriednotoutlamfure,  and  for  my  body I   defie  the  Colledge  of  Phyfitione ;
Let  a   jurie  of  Virgins  fearch  me.
IVi. To  be  plaine.
Although  fhee  has  no  thought  but  I   was  her  bed-fellow. You  are  the  only  argument  of  her  fadnes.
Ha.  How  can  that  be  / wf.When  I   hadmcrrilie
Excus’d  what  had  beene  done,  (he  fetch’d  a   fight.
And  with  fome  teares  reveal’d  her  love  to  you,
That  (he  had  lov’d  you  long,  but  by  this  ad Of inine,d*ee  marke,fhe  was  become  unworthie To*  hope  for  fo  good  fortune,  I   cannot  tell.
But  fheis  ftrangelie  paffionate.
Ha.  Forme?
tvi. For  you,  but  thou  art  foft  and  tender-heatted.
And  in  that  confidence  I   did  forbeare To  tell  her  who  had  done  the  deede.
Ha.  You  did  fo  :
5Twas  wifelie  done, now  I   colled  my  felfe,
Shee  has  fomctime  fail'd  upon  mee.
Wi.  Nay  beleevc  it
£hee  is  taken  with  thee  above  all  the  World.
Ffo.Andyet  fhee  was  content  you  Should ’Boveallthe  World.
But ’t was  your  better  fate To  be  the  man,  it  was  hcrdeftiny To  have  the  right  performance ,.  thou  art  a   gentleman, And  canft  not  but  confider  the  poore  gentlewoman.
Ha.  W hat  wod’ft  ha  me  dot  ?
^/.Make  her  amends,  and  marrie  her.
^rf.Marrfe  a   (trumpet?
the  Gawefter.
Wi?i  ou  bad  firft  pQTeflion,
And  thad’ft  teene  married  earlier  could  ’ft  but  had
Her  maiden-head,be(idesnobodic  knowesbut  we  ourfelves.
Ba.Bcc  not  abus'd]  had No  maiden  head.
tvl'Ny  greater  torment  .*  come,  come  thou  art  modeftj Heaven  knowes  (he  may  be  defperate.
Ha,  A   faire  riddance,
Wee  have  enough  o’th  tribe ,   1   am  forric  I   cannot Tumiih  her  expedition  withapaire Of  my  owne  Garters.
Wi.  I   of 'Athens  growne,
I   know  thou  art  more  charitable, (bee  may  prove Ahappie  wife, what  woman  hut  has  frailty?
Ba. Let  her  make  the  bed  on’c ,   fet  up  fhop Tth  Strand 3   or  Weftminfter,  fhe  may  have  cudome,
And  come  to  fpeake  mod  leamedlie  i’th  Nole Bid  her  keepe  quarter  with  the  Conftable,
And  Judices  Clarke  and  fhee  in  time  may  purchace.
#3.bhee  has  a   portion  will  maintaine  her  like  >
A   gentlewoman  and  your  wife.
Ba.  Where  id  ?
jvk  In  my  poifeflion,and  I   had  rather  thou Shouldd  have  it  then  another.
Mi. Than ke  you  heartily,
A   (ingle  life  has  (ingle  care,  pray  keepe  it.
fVt. Come  thou  (halt  know  l   love  thee,  thou  (halt  have More  by  a   thoufand  pound  ,   then  I   refoiv’d To  part  with  caufe  I   wod  call  thee  cozen  too  ;
A   brace  of  thoufands  tVill^  fhee  has  to  her  Portion,
I   hop’d  to  put  her  off  with  halfe  the  famine  ;
That  s   truth  fome  vonger  brother  wod  ha  thank'dmec. And  given  my  quietus  tufhftis  frequent With  men  that  are  fo  truited,  i’ft  a   match,
Mi.Two thoufand  pound  will  make  a   maiden-head That's  crooked  draight  agem Wi.  Th’art  in  the  right.
Or  for  the  better  found,  as  the  Grammarians Say,I  will  call  it  twentic  hundred  pound
The  Gamefterl
Belaay  a   pretty  ftocke  ,   enough  and  neede  be,
To  buy  up  halfe  the  maiden-heads  in  a   Countie.
Ha.  Hcer’s  my  hand  i’ie  confider  on’t  no  further*
Is  Ihee  prepar'd?
Wk  Leave  that  to  me.
■   Ha.  No  more.
fF/.Ple  inftantly  about  it.  Exit. ,
Ha.  Ha,  ha.
iTie  projed  moves  better  then  I   expected.
What  paines  he  takes  out  of  bis  ignorance  ?
Enter  barnacle.  ,
B*.  Oh  !   Sir  I   am  glad  I   ha  fonudyou.
Ha.  I   was  not  loft.
Brf.  My  Nephew  fit,  my  Nephew.
Ha.  What  of  him.
cAz.He’s  undone, he’s  undone, you  have  undone  him. ^.What’s  the  matter  ?
Vn.  You  have  made  him,  fir, fo  valiant  I   am  afraid He’s  not  long  liv’d, he  quarrells  now  with  every  body And  rQres  and  dominers  and  fhak’s  the  pen-houfes.
A   w   oman  that  fold  pudding-pies,but  tooke The  wall  on  him,  and  he  trips  up  her  heeles.
And  downefell  all, the  kennell  ranne  pure  white-pot  — What  fhall  I   doe  I   fearehe  will  be  kild- I   take  a   little  priviledge  my  felfe Becaufe  I   threaten  to  difinheritehim.
But  no  body  elfe  dares  talke  or  meddle  with  him Is  there  no  way  to  take  him  downe  agen And  make  him  coward?
There  are  wayes  to  tame  him.
B^.Now  I   with  heartilie  you  had  beaten  him For  the  hundred  pound.
Ha.Xbzt  may  bee  done  yet
B^.l’ft  notto  late?but  do  you  thinke ’twill  humble  him I   expect  ev  ery  minute  hee’s  abroad Tohearehehas  kild  fome  body,  or  receive  him Brought  1   ome  with  halfe  his  braines  or  but  one  legg* C’ood  ftr  *
Ai^.Whai:  wod  you  have  me  doe  ?
I
The  G amefierj ^tr.liepny  you  for’t
If  you  will  beatc  him  loundlie.  fir.  and  leave  funs But  as  you  found  him  ;   for  if  hee  continue A   blade  and  be  not  kil  d   ,he  wonot  (cape The  gallowes  long,  and  ’tis  not  for  my  honor He  IRould  be  hanged.
Ba\  (hall  delerve  as  much,
To  allay  this  mettall,  as  I   did  to  quicken  it.
%*.Nay’tismy  meaning  to  content  you,  fir.
And  I   fhall  take  it  as  a   favour  too,
3f  for  the  fame  price  you  made  him  valiant,
You  will  unblade  him  :   here’s  the  money  fir,
As  waightie  gold  as  tother ;   caufe  you  fhouldnot Lay  it  on  lightlie  ;   breakeno  limb,  and  bruife  him Three-quarters  dead,  I   care  not*  he  may  live- Many  a   fa  ire  day  after  it.
Ba. You  (hew
An  Uncles  love  in  this,tmft  me  to  cure His  valour.
i>rf.Hee  is  here ;   do  but  obferve.
Enter  Nephew,  *
Andbeate  him, fir,  accordinglie.
Ate.  How  now  Uncle  2 ^.Thou  art  no  Nephew  of  mine,  tha’rta  rafcali rie  be  at  no  more  charge  to  make  thee  a   gentleman, Paie  for  your  Dice  and  drinkings,  I   (hall  have Ihe  Surgeons  bills  brought  (hortly  home  to  me.
Be  troubled  to  baile  thee  from  the  Sefiions,
And  afterwards  make  friends  to  the  Recorder For  a   Repreeve,ye5,I  will  fee  thee  bang’d  firft.
Ne.  And  be  at  the  charge  to  paint  the  gallowes  too- If  I   have  a   minde  the  waites  (hall  play  before  me, Andi’lebehang’d  in  (fate  three  fiories  higb,Uncle ; But  firfti  le  cut  your  throate.
*3ar, Bleffe  me,  defend  me.
8 titer  A cre-leffe  rfieU-awaj^  Little-fioche.
Acr  How  now, what's  the  matter  ?
-5V/.M after  barnacle  ?
2*r<Thei;[$  an  ungrations  bird  of  mine  owne  ndl.
The  Gamejlerl
Will  murder  me*
Lit. Hz  wonotfure  ?
Ha, Put  Up,
And  aske  your  Uncle  prefentlieforgivenefle  ■
Or  I   will  hoffe  thee.
2VV.  Hoffe  me  ?   I   will  put  tip At  thy  entreatie.
/^.Gentlemen  you  remember This  noble  gallant.
v&r.Cozen  of  yours  I   take  it.
Ha, Cozen  to  a   killing,in  your  company Lent  me  a   box  o’th  sare. iW.No,no,  I   gave  it,
I   gave  it  freelie ;   keepe  it , never  thinke  on’t,
I   can  make  bold  with  thee  another  time,
Wo’d  It’had  beene  twentie.
Afo.One’s  too  much  to  keepe.
I   am  a   Gamefier ,   and  remembred  alwayes To  pay  the  box ;   ther’s  fir  ft  your  principall ,
Take  that  for  the  ufe.
He  Ufe  wod  thad’ft  given  my  Ulicle>
Ha. They  have  coft  him  already  two  hundred  pounds And  upwards, fliotten  Herring, thing  of  noife.
A^.Ohjformyman  Dwindle And  his  basket-hilt  now  my  Unc^c  ihall  rue  this.
Ha. Downe  prefentlie,  and  before  thefe  gentlemen Defire  his  pardon.
AV. How, defire  his  pardon  ?
Ha. Then  let  this  go  round.
He.  I   will  aske  his  pardon  ,   I   befeech  you  Unc^»
Ha.  And  fweare.
Afe.And  do  fweare.
Ha. To  be  obedient,  nevermore  to  quarrell.
Ne.yvhy  looke  you  gentlemen,  I   hope  you  are  perluaded By  being  kicke  fo  patiently, that  I   am Not  over  valiant.
Bari  fufpeft  himftill.
iW.Lor  more  ail urance  doe  you  kicke  me  too.
Am  not  I   patient  and  obedient  now  ?
I   2   Witt
The  Gmeflet;
Will  you  have  any  more  gentlemen,before  I   rife  ?   ]
Ha. If  ever  he  prove  rebellious  in  ad.
Or  language,  let  me  know  it.
He.  Will  you  not  give Me  leave  to  roare  abroad  a   little  for My  credit  ?
Bar  .Never  ,(irra,  now  i’le  tame  you,
I   thanke  you  gentlemen,  command  me  for Ihiscurtefie.
AV.Tis  poflible  1   may With  letfe  noile  grow  more  valiant  hereafter:
Till  then  T   am  in  all  your  debts.
Bar  Be  raid,
And  be  my  Nephew  againe  s   this  Was  my  love*
My  love  deere  Nephew.
Ne.  If  your  love  confift In  kicking  Uncle,  let  me  love  you  agen3_
^.follow  me,(irra.
^cr.Then  his  Uncle  paid  fort  *
Ha.  Hartilie,  hartilie.
Lit.  I   thought  there  was  feme  tricke.
Ha.  And  whether  are  you  going  gentlemen  ?
Sel.  We  are  going  to  vifit  Beomont  in  the  Prifon.'
Ha.Tis  charity,  but  that  1   have  deepe  engagement.^
I’de  waite  upon  you, but  commend  my  fervice  to  him, lsle  vl(it  him  ere  night  ;you  faw  not  Wilding  *
J.L.SNVc  law  his  wife  and  kinf-woman  enter Sr. Richard  Hurries  halfe  an  houre  ago.
Ha  His  kinf-woman  ?   I   thanke  y   ou.
You  have  lav'd  me  travaile,  farewell  gentlemen, farewell.
Enter  Leonora ,   and  Vielante ,   Mifiris  Wildim ?a and.  Penelope.
LeoMy  father  has  fome  defigne,and  bad  me  fend  for  thee. Wi.  Y’are  both  too  fad,come,come,we  mull  divert This  melancholy.
Vio.l  befeech  your  pardon.
But  is  my  Beomnt  fent  lor  ?   -
7 he  Gamefler*
Leo.Ycs :   we  are Too  private.
Vio.  I   much  feare  Leonora  now,
Shee  lookesnot  fad  enough ,   although  I   could Reftgne  my  intereft  freely  to  preferve  him,
I   would  not  willingly  be  prefent  when
They  enterchange  hearts, ilie  will  fhew  too  much  -
A   tyrant ,   if  die  be  not  fatisfied
With  what  was  mine, but  I   muft  be  moite  i
To  be  their  triumph.
Enter  Hazards
Mi,  Maher  Hazard  ?
Ha.  All  things
Succeed  beyond  your  thought,  pray  give  me  a   little Opportunity  with  your  kinf-womam  Exit. Ml.  Leo. Vio, Leo,  Weele  withdraw.
-   Ha, I   know  not  l>ow  to  wooe  her  now,fweetLady.? JW.Your  pleafure,  fir  f Ha.Vxxy  let  me  aske  you  a   queftion.
If  you  had  loft  your  way  and  met  one,  *
A   traviler  like  my  felfe,  that  knew  the  coaft O’th  countrey,would  you.thanke  him  to  dire<ft  you  ?
Pene’, That  common  manners  would  inftruft.
Ha,  Ithinke  fo.
Pene, But  there  are  many  waies  to  the  wood,and  whic W   ould  you  defire,the  neareft  path,  and  fifeft Or  that  which  leads  about  ?
Without  all  queftion The  neereft  and  the  fofefh Ha,  Can  you  love  then  ?
Pene, I   were  a   divell  elfe :
Ha,  And  can  you  love  a   man  ?
Pene.  A   man,  what  elfe,fir  2 Ha, Y’are  fo  farre  on  your  way.  Now  love  but  mCj Y’areat  your joumics  end,  what  lay  to  me  ?
Eene.  N   othing ,   fir.
Ha.  That’s  no  anfwer,you  muft  fiy  fomething,
Pene. I   hope  ycu’le  not  compell  me.
13  H*
the  Gmejlerl
Ha.  B’eehe^re  Lady?
Setting  this  foolerie  afide  :   [know You  cannot  chute  but  love  me.
Pene.  Why  ?
Ha. I   have  beene  told  fb.
Pene. You  are  eahe  of  beleefe I   thinke  I   fhould  be  beft  acquainted  with My  owne  thoughts,  and  I   dare  not  be  fo  defperate To  conclude.
Ha. Come  you  lie ;   I   could  have  given't In  (mother  phrafe :   y’areadefiembling  gentlewoman.
I   know  your  heart,  you  have  lov’d  me  a   great  while.
What  fhould  I   play  the  foole  ?   if  you  remember I   urg’d  fome  wild  difcourfe  in  the  behalfe Ofyour  lewd  kindfrnan,  ’twas  a   triall  of  thee That  humor  made  me  love  thee  5   and  fincc  that  thy  vertue, Pene.  Indeede  hr  ?
Ha.  Indeede/ir?  why  I   have  beene  contra&cd  to  thee,
Pene.  How  long  ?
Ha. This  halfehoure,know  thy  portioned  fhallhave  it,
Pene.  Strange.
if^.Nay  iTe  have  thee  too.
Pene.  You  will  ?
Ha. I   cannot  helpe  ft^thy  kind  cozen  will  have  it  fo.*
Tis  his  owne  plott,to  make  thee  amends,  ift  not Good  mirth?but  Tis  not  love  to  thee  or  mee.
But  to  have  me  poffeft  hce  is  no  cuckold  .•
I   fee  through  his  dev  ice, thou  art  much  beholding  to  him  : He  meant  to  have  put  thee  off  with  halfe  thy  portion.
But  that  if  things  come  out  we  fhould  keepe  counfell.
Say  id  a   match  ?   I   have  two  thoufand  pound  too I   thanke  the  Dice, left’s  put  our  (locks  together,
Children  will  follow  ;   he  is  here  already.
Enter  Wilding.
JVl.  So  clofe, !   I   am  glad  on’t,this  prepares.  Will  Hazard, And  my  yong  Cozen ;   a   word  Penelope.
^.Now  will  he  make  all  fure.
Wl. You  u(’d  me  courfelie,
But  I   have  forgot  it,what  difcourfe  have  yoit
With
7 be  Gamef!erm
With  this  gentleman  ?
Pene. He  would  feeme  to  be  a   Sutor. r#?.Entcrtaine  him  ;   d’ee  heare,you  may  do  worfe,be  rul’d. *Twas  in  my  thought  to  move  it,  does  he  not Talke  ftrangelie  ?
Pene.  Of  what  £
ivl  Of  nothing,  let  me  counfell  you To  love  him, call  him  husband.
Pene. I   refolve
Never  to  marry  without  your  content.
Enter  esfcre-lejfe ,   Lit le-ftocke  .Sell.  away. ^.Gentlemen,  welcome.
.If  you  bellow  me,  fir,  I   will  be  confident I   am  not  loft, I   muft  confeffe  I   love  him.
f^/.No  more  .-then  loofeno  time,kinde  gentlemen,
Y’are  come  mo  ft  feafonahly  to  be  the  witneftes Of  my  confentjl  have  examin’d  both  ^
Your  hearts, and  freely  give  thee  here  my  kinfwoman  s Nofooner  lliall  the  Church  pronounce  you  married But  challenge  w   hat  is  hers.
Ha. Two  thoufand  pound.
JVll  do  confdfe  it  is  her  portion You  bhanot  ftay  to  talke,  nay  gentlemen.
Tray  fee  the  bufines  finibh’d.
H.L.S'Wc  attend  you.
^,So,fo,this  will  confirme  him  in  the  opinio * Penelope  was  the  creature  he  in  joy'd.
And  keepe  oft  all  fufpition  of  my  wife.
Who  is  dill  honeft  in  the  imagination That  only  1   embrac’d  heir,  all  fecure.
And  my  browes  fmooth  agen,  who  ern  deride  me ,
But  I   my  felfePha^that’s  too  much  1   know  it.
And  fpight  of  thefe  tricks  am  a   Qornslm.
Cannot  I   bribe  my  confidence  to  be.  ignorant  ? :
Why  then  I   ha  done  nothing, yes  advanc’d
The  man,that  grafted  bhame  upon  my  fore-head :   1
Vexation, parted  with  two  thoufand  pound,
And  am  no  lefte  a   cuckold  then  before Was  I   predeftin’d  to  this  bhame  and  mocker  ic?
Where
The  time jler.
Where  were  my  braines  ?   yet  why  am  I   impatient (jnleflebetrai’d  he  cannot  reach  the  knowledge,
And  then  no  matter — yes  I   am  curft  agen,
Vy  torment  multiplies,  how  can  he  thinks He  plaid  the  wanton  with  ‘Penelope When  he  finds  her  a   maide  ?   that  mines  all :
I   wod  line  had  beene  (trumpeted,  he  knowes My  wives  Virginitieto  well,  lam  loft.
And  mutt  be  defperate,kill  him ;   no,  my  wife.
Not  io  good,death  is-over  blacke  and  horrid,
And  I   am  grow ne  ridiculous  to  my  felfc.
I   muft  do  feme  thing.
Enter  Sr,  Richard  Hurry.
Afo.Mafter  Wildings  welcome,
Y’ave  beene  a   greataftranger.
WlDo  you  know  me?
Hu .   Know  you  ?
f^.They  fey  I   am  much  alter’d  alate. iV^.Thereisfome  alteration  in  your  forehead. WiMy  forehead  ?
Hu.  Tis  not  fmooth  cnoughjyou’re  troubled ;
Your  wife's  within.
Wi.  Shee  loves  your  daughter,  fir.
A/7/.When  faw  you  Matter  Beaumont  ?
JT/.Nut  to  day.
,   Hu. I   have  fent  for  him  ;   pray  ftay  ,and  witnes His  further  examination,  I   propounded A   way  to  doc  him  good  but  he  is  obftinate.
Would  I   could  change  condition  with  him  /
Wi. He  is  not  troubled  now  with  being  a   cuckold. You  iliall  command.
Enter  Mi (kris  Wilding,  and  a   Servant.
H   //.Your  husband  Lad Wi.W ife  y   ou  are  a   whore You  fhall  know  more  hereafter,
I   muft  goe  live  i’th  Lorreft.
Mi. And  I   i’th  Common.
Wi.  Sheele  turne  proftitutc.
Hu.  Attend  him  hither.  Mafter  Beaumont's  come
The  Cawefler,
Nay  you  (hall  favour  me  fo  much ,   here’s  the  gentleman Enter  <JM  after  Beaumont  with  Officers .
Already.
'Bea.  Sir, your  plcafure?by  your  command  I   am  brought  hither, I   hope  you  have  no  more  to  charge  me  with Then  freelie  I   have  confeft .   Hu.  Y es.
Be  a.  I   mud  anfvver You  can  have  but  my  life  to  fatisftc;
Piayfpeake  my  accufation.
//j/.Befides  the  offence  knowne  and  examin’d You  are  guilty
Of- that  which  all  good  natures  do  abhorre.
BeaXow  have  a   priviledge,but  donot  make  me Good  fir,  to  appeare  monftrous,  who  are  my Acculers  ?
Hu.  I   am  one.
Bea. And  my  judge  too:
1   have  finall  hope  to  plead  then,  but  proceeds.
And  name  my  trefpaife. "
Hu.Thzt  which  includes  all That  man  fhould  hate  ;   ingratitude.
Bea  You  have
Preferrd  a   large  inditement ,   and  are  the  firft That  ever  chargd  me  with't,it  is  a   ftaine My  foule  held  moftat  didance ,   but  defeend To  home  particular  ;   this  offence  doth  rife Or  fall  in  the  degree,  or  reference To  perfons  finn  d   againd,  to  whom  have  I Beene  fo  ingratefu!  1   ?
Hu. Ingrate  as  high  as  murder.  Bea  To  whom  ?
Hu. Thy  felfe,to  whom  that  life  thou  oughted  to  cherifli Thou  haft  undone 'Bea. I   am  not  fo  uncharitable How  ere  you  pleafe  to  urge  it,  but  I   know Why  you  conclude  fo  ,   let  me, fir, be  honed To  heaven  and  my  o\yne  heart,  and  then  if  life Will  follow, it  fliall  bee  welcome.
Still  per verfe:
Stand  forth  my  Leonora ,   looke  upon  her.
K   Bea .
7   be  Gtrnefler.
'   'Bex.  I   fee  a   comely  frame  which  canndt  bee Without  as  faire  a   minde.
Hi#.  With  her  I   make Once  more  a   tender  of  my  wealth  and  thy Enlargement.
Wl, How  can  you  difeharge  him, fir  ?
A///.Takc  you  no  care  for  that,  it  fhall  befecurki If  he  accept,  ’tisthe  lalttime  of  asking,
Anfwer  to  purpofe  now.
Bea.  There  fhall  neede  none,
Sir  to  forbid  this  marriage,  but  my  felfe ;
My  refolution  but  warme  before Is  now  a   flame,  I   honour  this  faire  Virgine,
And  am  too  poore  to  thanke  your  love,but  rriufl;  no?
Buy  life  with  fo  much  fhame,l  am  Violantes ,
My  laib  breath  fhall  confirme  it.
fVi'Beaumcnt  thinke  on’t A   little  better,  be  not  mad;ifthisbepofliblc Embrace  her  inftantlie.
Be a.  Shcc  docs  not  looke With  any  countenance  oflovc  upon  me  :
See ,   fh  ee  does  weepe, fVt. Sheele  love  thee  afterwards,
‘   And  fliee  doe  not,  fhe  can  but  cuckold  thee There  be  more  Eth  Pari  fli  man.
HV  Since  you  are  fo  peremptory So  peremptory  :here  receavc  your  fentence.
Live  and  love  happilie.
Vlo.  My  dearch  Beaumont.  «
tvi. To  what  purpofe  is  this? he  muft  behangd  for  D   cl  amor e, Ate.Kccr's  one  can  cleere  the  danger.
TVl. The  Surgeon  ?   did  not  you  fay  he  was  dead  ?
Sur. I   did,  to  ferve  his  ends,  which  you  fee  noble  ;
~D  el  am  ore  is  pafi  danger,  but  wants  flrength To  come  abroad.
Zf<?.Yougivc  me  another  life.
AV.  I   fee  heaven  has  decreedhim  for  thy  husband,
And  fliat have  my  confent  too.
Leo,  Now  you  bleffc  me.
The  Game  fief.
Hu.\  wifhedto  callthoe  fonne.pardon  my  trial  I,
Joy  ever  in  your  bofomes.
Bea.  I   fcclc  a   blefling
That  onely  can  be  thought,  filcncc  my  tongue.
And  let  our  hearts  difeourfe.
Enter  Haz*ard,P enclose,  Acrc-lefic^  Littl:~ftockejir>d Set  dway
H a.  Your  leave  gentlefolks  -x  who  wifhes  /oy,
Aud  a   bundle  of  boyes  the  firft  night  ?
H#.  Married  ?
T’ene.  Fa  ft  as  the  Prieft  could  tic  us,
sl.S.L.We  are  witndfes.
Hrf.Cozen  two  thoufand  pound  ,   and  Ladie  now I   mu  ft  thanke  you  for  this  among  the  reft Tistimeto  cleereall.
Wu  lie  be  divorc’d  now Wife  y’areaWhore.
Ha.  Ho  there,  no  6ugwvords,come Wee  muft  tell  fomething  in  your  eare.  Be  merry You  are  no  cuckold,  make  no  noife,  I   know That’s  it, offends  yourftomake.  V/i.  Ha  !
H^.I  touch’d  nor  her,  nor  this  with  one  rude  aftiom W eele  talke  the  circumftance  when  you  come  home .
Your  wife  expefted  you,  but  when  I   came She  had  prepar’d  light,  and  her  Cozen  here To  have  made  you  blufh  and  chide  you  into  honefty Seeing  their  chaft  fimplicitie  I   was  wonne To  filence,  which  brought  on  my  better  fortune.*
JVi.Czn  this  be  rcall  ?
Mi.  By  my  hopes  of  peace I’th  tother  World  you  have  no  injury:
My  plot  was  onely  to  betraie  you  to Love  and  repentance.
Pene .   Be  not  troubled, fir,
I   am  a   witnes  of  my  Cozens  truth,
And  hope  youle  make  all  prolper,  in  renewing Your  faith  to  her.
Hrf.Bc  wife  and  no  more  words:
Thou  haft  a   treafure  in  thy  wife ,   make  much  on  her  :
For  any  aft  of  mine,  Ihe  is  as  chaft
The  (jiW'ffpy,
hs  when  (lie  was  new  borne.  Love;!ove  her  J acke.
fV/.]  am  afham’d,  pray  give  me  all  forgivencs* I   fee  my.follieSjhea  ven  invite  me  gently To  thy  chaft  bed, be  rhon  againe  my  deareft^
Thy  vertue  (hall  inlcruT  me:/oy  to  all- Here  be  more.  — - — cDelamore  is  living,
And  Leonora  mark’d  to  injoy  him ,
Violate  is  poflfeftof  'Beaumont  too.
H^.Thefe  be  loves  miracles:  a   fpring  tide  flow In  every  bofome.
H^.This  day  let  me  feafl  you Anon  wee  le  vifit  Ddaynore „
Leo .   My  foulc Longs  to  laliite  him.
Ha.  Here  all  follyes  die.
May  never  Game  ft  er  have  worfe  fate  then  L
/
y
k
Imprimatur  Tho.  Wykes.
