Requested Title: HENRY THE FOURTH
Authors: William Shakespeare
Matched Anchor: THE HISTORIES OF THE LIVES AND RAIGNES OF HENRY THE THIRD, AND HENRY THE FOURTH. Kings of England
TCP: A34718
EEBO: 11954044
Source Title: The histories of the lives and raignes of Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth, Kings of England written by Sr. Robert Cotton and Sr. John Hayvvard.
Source Author: Cotton, Robert, Sir, 1571-1631.; Hayward, John, Sir, 1564?-1627.
Source Date: 1642
Source URL: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/A34718/master/A34718.xml
Metadata Score: 0.920
Unit Score: 0.920

---

THE HISTORIES OF THE LIVES AND RAIGNES OF HENRY THE THIRD, AND HENRY THE FOURTH. Kings of England
Written by Knights. Sr. ROBERT COTTON, And Sr. IOHN HAYWARD,
Knights
Sr. ROBERT COTTON,
And Sr. IOHN HAYWARD,
London, printed for William Sheares, and are to be sold at his Shop in Bedford-Street, in Cove • -garden neere the new Exchange, at the signe of the Bible, An 1642
A SHORT VIEW OF THE LONG RAIGN OF KING HENRY the third
W Earied with the lin gring calamities of Ci vill Armes, and af frighted at the sudden fa • l of a licentious So veraigne, all men stood at gaze, expecting the event of their long desires (Peace) and issue of their new hopes (Benefit.) For in every shift of Princes there are few, either so meane, or modest, that please not themselves with some probable ob ject of preferment. Hist. Mi nor. Ma • . Paris. To satisfie all, a child ascendeth the throne, mild and gracious, but easie of nature, whose Innocency and naturall goodnesse led him safe along the various dangers of his Fathers Raigne: Happy was hee in his Vnkle the Earle of Pem brooke, the guide of his infancy, and no lesse then for thirty yeares after, whil'st De Burgo, that fast servant of his Fathers against the French, both in Normandy and England, with By god Earle of Norfolke, and others of like gravity and experience did mannage the affaires. Few and no other were the distempers then in State, but such as are incident to all, the Commons greedy of liberty, Matth. Paris. Hist. Ma jor. and the Nobili • y of Rule, and but one violent storme raised by some old and constant fol lowers of his Father, Fulco de Brent de Fortibus, and others, men that could onely thrive by the Warres, misliking those dayes of sloath (for so they ter med that calme of King Henries Go vernment;) and the rather because the Iustice of quiet times urged from them to the lawfull owners, such Lands and Castles, as the fury of Warre had unjustly given them, for finding in the uprightnesse of the King, that power of protection should not bee made a wrong doer, they fell out into that rebellion, that with it, ended their lives and competitours, professing that those their swords that had set the Crowne upon their Soveraignes head, Hist. S. Albani. when neither Majesty nor Law could, should now secure those small pittances to their Maisters, when Ma jesty or Law would not. Dangerous are too great benefits of Subjects to their Princes, when it maketh the mind onely capable of merit, nothing of duty. No other disquiet did the State after this feele, but such as is in cident in all, the malice to Authority: Good and great men may secure themselves from guilt, but not from envy: for the greatest in trust of pub like affaires are still shot at by the aspiring of those that deeme them selves lesse in imployment then they are in merit. These vapours did ever and easily vanish so long as the helme was guided by temperate Spirits, and the King tied his Actions to the rule of good Councell, and not to young, passionate, or single advise
Chron. de Dunest • o an. de Wal lingford. Thirty yeares now passed, and all the old guides of his youth now dead, but De Burgo, (a man in whom no thing of worth was wanting but mo deration,) whose length of dayes gi ving him the advantage of sole pow er, his owne Ambition and age gave him desire, and Art, to keepe out o thers, which wrought him into the fatall envy of most, and that encreased in the Title of Earle, and great Of fices the King then gave him. Time by this, had wrought, as in it selfe, so in the hearts of the people, a Revolu tion, the afflictions of their Fathers forgotten, and the surfeit of long peace; perchance having let in some abuses; from hence, the Commons to whom dayes present seeme ever worst, commend the foregone ages they never remembred, and con demne the present, though they knew neither the disease thereof, nor the re medy
To these idle and usuall humours, Chron. d • Litchfield. fell in some of the yong and noble Spirits, warme and over-weaning (who being as truly ignorant as the rest) first by sullying the wisedome of the present, and greatest Rulers, (making each casuall mishap their er rours:) seeme to decipher every ble mish in Government, and then by holding certaine imaginary and fan tastick formes of Common-wealths, flatter their owne beleefe and ability, that they can mold any State, to these generall rules, which in particular application will prove idle and grosse absurdities
Next confirmed in their owne worth by Sommery and Spencer, Gua • ▪ de Coven. they take it a fit time to worke themselves into action, and imploym • nt, a thing they had long desired, and now (though unwilling to seeme so) doe sue for; and doubtlesse, the furthest of their aime was yet, to become quiet instruments in serving the State, if they had beene then held fit and wor thy
But the King taught by the new Earle, That Consilia senum hastas ju venum esse ; and that such wits, (for so they would bee stiled) were N • vandis quam gerendis rebus aptiores ; fitter in being factious to disorder, then to settle affaires, either denied or delayed their desires; for wise Princes will ever choose their In struments Par negotiis, and not supra, Creatures out of meere election, that are onely theirs, otherwise, without friends or power
Mat. Pa ris. Hist. Minor. Amongst this unequall medly, there were of the Nobility, Richard Earle of Pembrooke, Glocester, and Hartford, darlings of the multitude; some for the merit of their Fathers, whose memories they held sacred, as Pillars of publike, liberty and opposers of encroaching Monarchy at Run • meed the Armies met. And of the Gentry, Pitz-Geffeory, Bardolph, Grisley, Chron. ••• tri Pecta • vien. Maun sell and Fitz-Iohn, Spirits of as much Acrimony and Arrogant spleene, as the places from whence they were elected, Campe, Court, or Countrey, could afford any: These by force would effect what the other did af fect by cunning; but all impatient, to see their ends thus frustrate, and that so long as the King followed the di rection of the Earle of Kent, they had small hope of their desires, they made often meetings; and as one saith of them, Mat. Pa ris. Clam and nocturnis colloquis aut flexum in vesperum die
In the end, Sommery and Spencer, two that were farre in opinion with the rest, Gentlemen, by Forraine edu cation and imployment, more qua lified then usually men of these times; and that set upon their owne deserts; the best places when the Streame should turne, (which one of them, Spencer, did unworthily obtaine, for he died in actuall Rebellion, Iust • ciarius Angliae, against his master) advised that the best meanes to re move that great and good obstacle, the Earle of Kent, out of the way of their advancement, was by sifting in to his actions, and siding with his opposite. Peter Bishop of Winchester, (an ill man, but gracious with the King) making still their ends, that the worthiest being driven out by the worst, they shall either bee able to mate him with his owne vice, which will bee ever more visible, as hee is more potent, and so remove him at pleasure; or else give over the King to such Ministers, to their bad de sires, as loosing him the hearts of his people, might smooth them away to their bad desires, Cicero in Cattal. sive Orat. pri ma. Honores quos quieta Reipublica desperant, perturbata conse qui se posse arbitrantur. Thus, Counsell heard, approved and put in practice, the corrupt, and ambitious Bishop is easily insnared to their part, by mo ney and opinion, or increase of pow er
Articles are in all hast forged, and urged against the Earle, as sale of Crowne land; wast of the Kings Trea sure; and lastly, (that which these doubtfull times held capitall) his gi ving allowance to any thing that might breed a rupture betweene the Soveraigne and the Subjects, as hee had done in making way with the King, to annihilate all Patents gran ted in his nonage, and enforced the Subject to pay as the record saith, Non juxta singulorum facultat • m ▪ Lib. Ber monsey vi t • Ahhatis Albani. sed quicquid Iustitiarius aestimabat
Well? hee cleared himselfe of all, but the last, and did worthily perish by it; for acts that fill Princes Cof fers, are ever the ruines of their first Inventers; bad times corrupt good Councels, and make the best Ministers, yeeld to the lust of Princes, there fore this King cannot passe blame lesse, that would so easily blemish all former merits, of so good a servant, for that wherein himselfe was chiefe in fault
But Princes natures are more va riable, and sooner cloid then others, more transitory their favours, and as their minds are large, so they easily over-looke their first election, tying their affections, no further then their owne satisfactions
The Bishop now alone manageth the State; chooseth his chiefe instru ment, Peter de Rivallis, a man like himselfe; displaceth his natives, and draweth Poictions and Brittons into Offices of best trust, and benefit; and the King into an evill opinion of his people. For nothing is more against the nature of the English, then to have Strangers rule over them: of this mans time, Wendover, an Authour then li ving, saith, Iuditia commutuntur in justis Leges ex legibus Pax discordan tibus justitia injuriosis. Thus the plot of the tumultuous Barons went cleare, and had not the discreeter Bishop calmed all by dutifull perswasions, Regis Rof fen. Annalis de • ly. and informing the King that the sup port of this bold mans power (whose carriage before had lost his Father, Normandy the love of his people, and in that his Crowne) would by teaching the sonne to reject in pas sion the just petitions of his loyall Subjects, (as of late the Earle of Pem brooke his Earle Marshall of England the due of his Office) drive all the State into discontent by his bad ad vise, and corrupt manners, doubtlesse the rebellious Lords had ended this distemper, as their designe was, in a civill Warre
Regis Rof fen
Annalis de • ly
Denials from Princes must bee sup plied with gracious usage, that though they cure not the sore; yet they may abate the sence of it; but best it is, that all favours come directly from them selves; denials and things of bitternesse from their Ministers
Thus are the Strangers all displaced and banished, Claus. an no 37. H. 3. M. 26. Chron. Hall. Rivallis extortions ran sackt, by many strict Commissions of enquiry; the Bishop sent away dis graced, finds now that Nulla quae sita scelere potentia diuturna ; and that in Princes favours there is no subsistance betweene the highest of all, and pre cipitation. The Lords still frustrate of their malicious ends, beganne to sow of these late grounds of the peo ples discontent, Querelas and ambiguos de Principe sermones and quo que alia tur bamenta vulgi, and tooke it up a fa shion to endeare and glorifie them selves with the sencelesse multitude, by depraving the Kings discretion, and Governement, whose nature too gentle for such insolent Spirits, was forced (as Trevet saith) to seeke as hee presently did, advise and love a mongst strangers, seeing no desert could purchase it at home, all bore themselves like Tutors and Control lers, few like Subjects and Councel lours. God wee see holdeth the hearts of Princes, and sendeth them such Councellours as the quality of the Sub ject meriteth
For Mountford a Frenchman be came the next Object of the Kings delight, Chron. Litchf. a Gentleman of choyce blood, education, Mat. Pa ris, Roger Wend • ver. and feature, on this mans content, the heady affection of the Soveraigne did so much Doate, that at his first entrance of Grace, in envy of the Nobility, hee made him Earle of Leycester ; and in no lesse offence of the Clergy, by violating the rites of the holy Church, gave him his vowed, vailed sister to wife: More of Art then usually some have dee med this act of the Kings, making the tye of his dependancy, the strength of his assurance, so both at his will
Mountford made wanton thus with dalliance of his Master, Chron. Ioan. Sul grave. for getteth moderation, for seldome discretion in youth attendeth great and suddaine fortunes, hee draweth all publike affaires into his owne hands, all favours must passe from him, all preferments by him, all suites ad dressed to him, the King but as a ci pher set to adde to this figure, the more of number. Great is the Soveraignes errour, when the hope of Subjects must recognize it selfe beholden to the servant, which ought immediate ly to bee acknowledged, from the goodnesse and good election of him selfe: Though Princes may take above others some reposefull friend, with whom they may participate their nee rest passions; yet ought they so to tem per the affaires of their favour, that they corrupt not the effects of their principalities
At this the great and gravest men began to grieve, knowing the unwor thy without honour, or merit, thus to deale alone in that which should passe through their hands, and to leape over all their heads, to the greatest Honour and Offices, and therefore runne along with the then rising grace of the Kings halfe brethren, (though strangers) hoping thereby to devide that power, which o therwise they saw impossible to breake
Chron. Re • ding. Leycester confident of his Masters love, and impatient to beare either rivall in favour, or partner in rule, op poseth them all, but findeth in his ebbe of favour, the Fortune of others, and that this King could ever as easily transferre his fancy, as hee had setled his affection. Great wee see must bee the art and cunning of that man, that keepes himselfe a sloate in the streame of Soveraignes favour, since the change of Princes wils, which for the most part are full of fancy and soone satiate are hardly arrested: Who so would effect this ▪ must onely attend the honour and service of his Master, and dispoiled of all other respects, transforme himselfe into his inward inclination and worke into necessity of imployment, by undergoing the Of fices of most secrecy, either of publick service, or Princes pleasures; hee must also beate downe Competitours of worth by the hands of others, con ceale his owne greatnesse in publick, with a fained humility, and what im potency or Government hee affecteth, let it rather seeme the worke of o thers, out of conveniency, then any ap petite of his owne
Now were the raines of rule, by this advantage, H. Knigh ton. Moh. Leycest. taken by the rebellious Lords, and put alone into the hands of the Kings halfe brethren: Adam, Guido, Godfray, and William, himselfe as before; Et magna Fortu • a licentiam tantum usurpans: For to act his owne part, hee was ever wier-drawne when he had such worthy servants as would often for his Honour urge it. For these Masters, (as Wallingford termeth them) Tanta ela • i jactantia quod nec sup riorem sibi intelligunt, nec parem mellitis and mollitis adulationibus ani mum Regis pro libito voluntatis a ra tione tramite declinantes ; doe alone what they list. They fill up the place of Iustice and Trust, with their Coun trey-men, strangers exact of whom, how, and what they please, wast the Treasure and Crowne lands on them selves, and their followers; set prices on all offences, and raine the Law within the rule of their owne Breasts. Wil. de Risharger. The usuall reply of their servants, to the plaints of the Kings Subjects, be ing Quis tibi rectum saciet? Dominus rex vult; quod Dominus meus vult ; these Strangers seemed in their Law lesse carriage not to have beene in vited, Lib. Mo nastery Rams • y. but to have entred the state by Conquest: The great men they en forced not to obey, but to serve, and the meane to live so as they might justly say, they had nothing; yet least the King should heare the groanes of his people, and the wickednesse of his Ministers, which good and able men would tell him, they barre all such ac cesse: Suspition being the best pre server of her owne deserts; aimeth at these, who hath more of vertue then themselves, as fearing them most. Thus is the incapacity of Go vernment in a King, when it fals to bee a prey to such Lawlesse Minions, the ground of infinite corruption in all the members of the State; all take warrant gener • lly from Princes weakenesses, of licentious liberty and greatnesse, makes profit parti cularly by it, and therefore give way to encrease ill, to encrease their gaines
A Famine accompanieth these corruptions, and that so violent, Claus. an no 42. Hen. 3. that the King is enforced to direct Writes to all the Shires, Ad pauperes mortuos sepelicendos famis media deficientes: Chro. Lon don. Fa mine proceeds, Fames praecessit and se cutus est gladius tam terribilis ut n • mo inermis secura possit, Provincias per agare: For all the Villages of the Kingdome were left a prey to the lawlesse Multitude: Who Per diversas partes itinerantes velut per Consentum aliorum, (as the Record saith) did im ply that the factious Lords suspe cted by the King, had given some heat to that commotion; Seditious Peeres bringing ever fewell to such popular fires
Neither was the Church without a busie part in this Tragick worke; Wil. de Risharger. for Walter Bishop of Worcester, and Ro bert of Lincolne, to whom Mount ford and his faction, Prae cordialiter adhaerebant were farre ingaged. In such designes, Church-men are never wanting, and the distast of the present Government, (as well in the Church as in the Common-wealth) will ever bee a knot of strength for such unquiet Spirits, who as well frame to them selves some other forme of Govern ment; then the present in the Church, as in the temporall state, as that which with the giddy multitude win neth best opinion, and did at this time fitly suite the peoples humours, so much distasting the new Courts of the Clergy, their pompe, their greedinesse, and the Popes extortions
A faire pretext was it to those fa ctious Bishops, to use their bitter pens and speeches, so farre against Reli gious Orders, Ceremonies, and State of the Church, that one of them in curred the sentence of Excommu nication at Rome, and Treason at home; for hee enjoyned the Earle of Leycester, Mat. Pa ris. In remissione peccatorum ut causam illam (meaning his Rebelli ons) usque ad mortem assumeret, asse rens pacem Ecclesiae Auglicanae nun quam sine gladio materiali posse firma ri. Wil. de Risharger. It was not the best Doctrine that this man could plant, by liberty or warre, when the first Church rose by fasting and prayer
True Piety binds the Subject to desire a good Soveraigne, but to beare with a bad one, and to take up the burthen of Princes with a bended knee, rather in time so to deserve abate ment, then resist authority
Church-men therefore ought not alwayes to leade us in the rule of Loyalty, but a knowledge of our owne duties, in difficult points of Religion, where an humble ignorance, is a safe and secure knowledge, wee may rely upon them
To suppresse these troubles, and sup ply the Kings extremity, a Parliament was called, Barth. Co ron. much to the liking of those Lords ▪ who as little meant to releeve the King, as they did to ac quiet the State, Chron. Norwic. Chron. Worc. their end at that time being onely to open at home the po verty of their Master, to lessen his re putation abroad, and to brave out their owne passions freely, whil'st those times of liberty permit
Here they began to tell him hee had wronged the publick State, in taking to his private election the Iustice, Chancellour, M. Paris. and Treasurer, that should bee onely by the Common Councell of the Realme, commen ding much the Bishop of Chicester, Wendo ver. for denying delivery of the great Seale, but in Parliament where he received it
They blame him to have bestowed the best places of trust ▪ Walling ford. and benefit in his gift on Strangers, and to leave the English unrewarded, Paris. to have undone the trade of Merchants, by bringing in Maltolts and heavy customes, Wil de Risharger. and to have hurt the Common liberty, by non obstantes in his Parents, to make good Monopolies for private favo rites
That hee hath taken from his Sub jects. Chron. S. Albani. Quicquid habuerunt in esculentis and poculentis Rust • coruin enim • ques bigas vina victualia ad libitum cae pit
That his Iudges were sent in cir cuites, under pretext of Iustice, to fleece the people, Causis fictitiis quas cunque poterant diripuerunt
And that Sir Robert de Purslowe had wrong from the Borderers of his Forrest, under pretence of en • rochments or assarts, great summes of money
And therefore, they wonder, that hee should now demand reliefe from his so pilled and polled Commons, Gual ▪ de Covenary ▪ who by their former extremities; Et per auxilia priu • data ita depa • perantur, ut nihil aut parum habeant in bonis. And therefore advised him, that since his needlesse expence, Post quam regni caepit esse dilapidatur, Wil de Risharger. was summed up by them to above 800000. l. It were fitting to pull from his favorites, who had gleaned the Treasure of his Kingdome, and shared the old Lands of the Crowne, seeing one of them there, whom the Lords described to bee Miles litte ratus, or Clericus militaris, who had in short space from the inheritance of an acre, Chron. Litchf. growne to the Possession of an Earledome; and Mansel ano ther inferiour Clarke that (besides 50. promotions with the cure of soules) rose to dispend in annuall revenue 4000. markes, Hist. Mi nor. Wil. de Risharger. Epist. Ro bert. Lin colne. whereas more mo derate Fees would have become a pen-man, no better quallified then with the ordinary fruits of a writing Schoole; yet if a moderate supply would suite with the Kings occasions, they were content to performe so farre reliefe in Obedience, as the de sert of his carriage should merrit to ward them: And so as the Record saith, Matth. Paris. Dies datur suit in tres septima nas ut interim Rex excessuos suos cor rigeret, and Magnates voluntati ejus ob temperarent
At which day upon new grant of the great Charter, Regis Rof fen. admittance to his Councell of some persons elected by the Commons, and promise to rely upon his Natives, and not Strangers; Iohan. de Walling ford. for advise hereafter; they spare him such a pittance as must tie him to their Devotion, for a new sup ply
Thus Parliaments that before were ever a medicine to heale up any rup ture in Princes fortunes, are now growne worse then the mallady, sith from thence more malignant humours beganne to raigne in them, then well composed tempers
The King by this, experienced of the intents of his rebellious Lords, Chron. de Litchf. and finding that the want of Treasure was the way whereby they inthralled his Majesty, begins now to play the good husband closeth his hand of wast, and resolves himselfe (too late) to stand alone, such experience is per nitious to the private, and dangerous to the publique good of a State, when it never learnes to doe, but by un doing, and never sees order, but when disorder shewes it. Yet still ▪ alas, such was his flexibility, when hee came to bee pressed by his French Minions, that hee could not hold his hand any longer, from their vast desires, and endlesse wast. So that an Authour then living, saith, it became a by word, Our inheritance is converted to Allien • , and our houses to Strangers. Followers to a King excessive in guifts, are excessive in demands, and cut them not out by reason, but by example: Favours p • st are not accomp ted, wee love no bounty but what is meerely future; the more that a Prince weakeneth himselfe in giving, the poorer hee is of friends: For such pro digality in a Soveraigne, ever ends in the rapine and spoile of his Subjects
Yet before the King would againe submit himselfe, as hee had the last Parliament, to so many brave and strict inquiries of his disloy • ll Sub jects, hee meaneth to passe through all the shifts, that extremity of need, with greatnesse of mind could lay up on him. Hee beginneth first with sale of Lands, and then of Iewels, Claus an no 46. and 47. Hen. 3. pawneth Gascoyne, and after that, his Imperiall Crowne, and when hee had neither credit to borrow, (having so often failed, the trust hee had made, Claus ▪ an no 37. Hen. 3. ) nor pawnes of his owne, hee then layeth to pawne the Iewels and Ornaments of St. Edwards Shrine ; and in the end, not having meanes to defray the diet of his Court, was enforced to breake up house, (and as Paris saith) with his Queene and Children, Cum Abbatibus and Prioribus satis humil • ter Hospitia qua sivit and prandia
This low ebbe, which againe the Kings improvidence had brought him to, gave great assurance to the Rebellious Lords, that they should now at the last, have the Soveraigne power, left a prey to their ambi tious designes, and to bring it fa ster on, they desire nothing more, then to see the Kings extremi ty. Constraine a Parliament, for at such times, Princes are ever lesse then they should bee, Subjects more
Wil. de Rishanger. To hasten on the time, and adapt the meanes, there are sowne cer taine seditious rumours, that the Kings necessity must repaire it selfe upon the fortunes and blessings of his people, that having no thing of his owne left, hee might and meant to take of others: For Kings may not want, as long as the Subjects have meanes to sup ply
This tooke fire just to their minds, and wrought a little mo ving in the State, which doubt lesse had flamed higher, if the King had not asswaged it by Proclama tions, wherein hee declared, Quod qui dam malivoli sinistra praedicantes, Claus. an no 9. • ib. 3. illis falso suggesserant, illum velle eos indebite gravari, ac jura and liber • atos Regni subvertere, and per suggestiones illas do losas and omnina falsas eorum corda a sua maledictione, and fidelitate averte rent, but desireth, that, Hujusmodi ani morum suorum perturbationibus ne fi nem adhiberent ; for that hee was ever ready to defend them from the op pression of the great Lords, Et om nia jura and consuetudinis eorum debitas bonas, and consuetas, in omnibus and per omnia ple • ius observare, and that they may rest of this secure: D • volun • a • e sua libera litteras suas f • cit patentes. But seeing still, that Majesty and right subsist not without meanes and pow er, and himselfe had of neither, so much as would stop the present breach in his owne wants, or his Sub jects loyalties, hee flieth to the bo some of his people, for reliefe and Councell
At Oxford they met in Parliament, Parl. Ox • on. where his necessity, met so many undutifull demands, that hee was for ced to render up to their Rebellious will, his Royall power
Heere the Commons knowing that, Quum elegere inceperunt, they were Loco libertatis, stood with the King to have the managing of the State, Matth. Paris. Chron. Worc. put to the care of twenty foure, whereof twelve by their election, (whereto they looke strictly) and the other by him, who in all things else, was left a Cipher, and in this, whe ther by feare, or remissenes, filled up his number with Mountford, Chron. Lit • hf. Gloce ster, and Spencer, which besides the weakening of his owne part, wonne to those his late opposites, an opinion of great interest they had got in his favour, hee now hath left neither ele ction of publick office, nor private attendants, his halfe brethren and their followers, hee must dispoile of all for tune, and exile by prescription under his owne hand, commanding his writs, Pro transportatione fratrum suo rum, to bee directed to the Earles of Hartford and Surrey, and not to passe either their Money, Armes, or Orna ments, Nisi in forma quam dicti Comi tes injunxerent, and after their depar ture enjoyned the men of Bristoll, Claus. a •• no 49. Hen. 3. that they should not permit any Stran gers, Sive propinquos Regis applicare in portu, but so to behave themselves therein, that as well the King, Quam Magates sui eos merito d • beant c • mm • n dare
Thus wee see, how easily mens estates doe change in a moment, and how hard it is to make use of all things ill gotten
Richard elect of the Empire, the Kings full brother, and then beyond Sea, must bee wrought by letter, as his free desire to confirme by oath those former restrictions of regall power; Chron. S. Albani. which though performed, yet would the Lords suffer neither the one or the other, to enter Dover Castle (the key of the Kingdome) which they had furnished, Regis Rof fen. as most of the other Fortes of reputation in the Realme with Guardians of their owne, sworne respectively to the State; and then taking the like assurance of all the Shrieffes, Bailiffes, Coroners, and o ther publick Ministers, searching the behaviour of many by strict Com mission upon oath, Rot. in Scrio. Wil. de Rishanger. to winne opinion in shew among the Vulgar, who groaned under their late Extortions, whereas their end was truly, as it after proved, by displacing the faithfull servants of the King, to open a way, to their owne depen dants
Thus changing sole power into the rule of many, and those by popu lar election, made the State beleeve, that this forme of limited policy, they had utterly suppressed the mind of man, for ever dreaming more up on the imaginary humours of licen cious Soveraignty: But it fell out nothing so, for now every man be ganne to estimate his owne worth, and to hammer his head on every de signe, that might enlarge his power and command
Then beganne the great men to rent from the body of the Crownes, and regall Signiories, all such royall Suitours as neighboured any of their owne seats, Scacar. whereto they enforce their service, and so (as the Record saith) Ad sectas indebitas, and servitutes intollera b • les subditos Regis compulerunt: Thus raising meane manners to become great Honours, and renting a sunder the regall Iustice, they made them selves of so many Subjects whil'st they lived in duty, Totid • m Tiranni (as the booke of Saint Albans saith) when they had left their loyalty, Magnas induxerunt Magnates Reg ni, Rot. • egi • in Sc •• a. 56. H. 3. super subditos Regis servitutes and op pressiones, which they bore patiently; for excesse of misery having no ease but Custome, made men willing to lay the foundation of servitude by the length of sufferance, which found no ease or end, untill the quiet of this Kings raigne
Mountford, Glocester, and Dispen cer, Walling ford. the heads of this Rebellious de signe, having by the late provisions drawne to the hands of the twenty foure Tribunes, of the people, the en tire mannaging of the Royall State, and finding that power too much di • perced, to worke the end of their desires, forst againe the King to call a Parliament, where they delivered over the authority of the twenty foure unto themselves, and create a Trium virate, Wil. de Risha • ger. non constituenda Republicae cau sa, as they first pretended, for their owne ends, Chron. de Dunst. and so in the interest of some private contented, the publike was stayed; but to make a speedier way to one of them as it fatally did, to become Dictator perpetuus: Ambi tion is never so high, but shee thinkes still to mount, that station which seemed lately the top, is but a step to her now, and what before was great in desiring, seemes little being once in power
These three, elect nine Councel lours, and appoint, Quod tres ad minus alternatim semper in curia sint, Ord •• at. inter Rec. Lond. to dispose of the custody of Castles ▪ Et de aliis Regni negotiis, the chiefe Iu stice, Chancellour, and Treasurer, with all offices ▪ Majores and minores, they reserve the choyce of to themselves, and bind the King to this hard bar gaine upon such strong security ▪ that hee is contented under the great Seale, and Oath, to loose to them the knot of Regall duty, whensoever hee assu meth to himselfe his Regall dignity, Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos, Chron. O rigin. sub •• gillo. in surgere and ad gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare at si nobis in nullo tenerentur. This prodigy of fortune of whom shee had set a pittifull exam ple of her inconstancy ▪ finding no part of his Soveraignty left, but the bare Title, and that at their leave, beggeth succour from Vrbane the fourth, a gainst his disloyall Subjects
The Pope by his Bull cancelleth his Oath, and contract, and armed him with Excommunications against all those that returne not with speed, to their due and old obedience, since promises made by men, which cannot say they are at liberty, are weake, and force hath no power to make just in terest
The Lords on the other side, Chron. Luchf. Wil. d • Risha • ge • that had imped their wings with Eagles feathers, and liked no game now, but what was raked out of • he ashes of Monarchy, made head against their Soveraigne, and to mate him the bet ter, called in aid, some French forces: Thus the Common-wealth turned a gaine her sword into her owne bow els, Chr. Bri tanniae. and invited her ancient Enemy, to the funerall of her liberty, so that it was a wonder, shee should not at this time passe under a forraine servitude. Chron. Dunst. And though these men were more truly sensible of their owne disgrace, then of others misery: Yet found they no better pretext for private interest then that of the publick
And therefore at the entry of this Warre, they cried liberty, although when they came neere to an end, they never spake word of it
At Lewis the Armies met, where the King endeavours a reconciliation, but in vaine, Wil. de Risharger. for perswasions are ever unprofitable, when Iustice is inferiour to force
The sword decides the difference, and gave the two Kings, and their eldest Sonnes Prisoners. The person now as well as the regall power, thus in the hands of Mountford and Gloce ster, found neither bound of security, nor expectation of liberty, but what the emulous competition of great nesse (which now beganne to breake out betweene these mighty Rivals,) gave hope of, for Leycester meaning by ingrossing from his partner, to himselfe, the person of the King, and to his followers the best portion of the spoile, to draw more fruit from this advantage, then it should in fel lowship yeeld, dissolved the knot of all their amity
Thus equall Authority with the same power, is ever fatall (wee see) to all great actions: For to fit minds to so even a temper, that they should not have some motions of dissenting is impossible
Mountford having thus broken all faith with his confederates, and duty to his Soveraigne, left the path of moderation and wisedome, to come to the King, by that of pride and di strust. To him, he telleth, that his armes and ends had no other object ever but order of the State, and ease of the people, that hee did not in this, car ry affection against duty, but well knew how to reine his desires, to his just power, and so no lesse to his Ma jesties content, if hee would bee ru led; which was to command the Fortes and Castles of his now oppo site Glocester, and the rest into his hands. It was hard to this King thus to take a Law from his inferiour, but necessity in Soveraigne affaires doth often force away all formality; and therefore this poore Prince, who now at the Victors discretion, see med to have beene onely raised to shew the inconstancy of fortune and vanity of man, suited himselfe with incomparable wisedome according to the necessity of the time; Neither did humility wrong Majesty, when there was no other meanes to con taine Spirits so insolent, but dissem bling. Hee therefore summoneth in his owne person the forts of his fastest friends, to yeeld to his greatest ene mies. This hee enters in shew as his lodging, but in effect his prison, and saw himselfe forced to arme against his friends, and to receive now Law from him, to whom hee lately thought to give it. Thus Leycester is become a darling of the Common rout, who easily change to every new Master, but the best durst not saile along his fortune, by the light of his glory: Christall that fairely glistereth doth easily breake, and as the ascent of usur ping royalty is slippery, so the top is shaking, and the fall fearefull. To hold this man then at the entry of his false felicity fully happy, was but to give the name of the Image, to the mettle that was not yet molten, for by this, the imprisoned Prince was escaped, and fast assured of Glocester, by the knot of his great mind, and discontent, and both with the torne remainder of the loyall Army united, and by speedy march arrived unloo ked for, neere Evesham, to the unar med troupes of the secure Rebels, whom they instantly assailed, for it was no fit season to give time, when no time did assure so much, as expedi tion did promise
Dispencer and other Lords of that faction, made towards the King, with the best speed for mercy, but could not breake out, being hurried a long the storme of the giddy multi tude
Publick motions depends on the conduct of Fortune; private on our owne carriage, we must be ware of running downe steep hils, with weighty bodies, they once in motion, Suo feruntur pond • re, stops are not then voluntary; but Leycester at that instant with the King, and out of the storme might have escaped, if his courage and hope had not made him more resolute by misfortune, so that hee could neither forsake his followers, nor his ambition; thus making adver sity the exercise of his vertue, hee came and fell
The King by the blessed For tune freed, and obeyed, beganne to search the ground of his former misery, and why that Vertue and Fortune that had so long setled and maintained under his Ancestors the glory of his Empire, had cast her in his time off, and conspired with her Enemies, to her almost ruine, as if the Genius of the state had quite forsooke her; Here hee finds his wastfull hand had beene too quick, both over the fortunes and the blessings of his People, th • griping Avarice of his Civill Mini sters and lawlesse liberty of his Martiall followers, Rot. part. 53. H. 3. M. 51. Rishanger. the neglect of grace, and breach of his word, to have lost his Nobility at home, and ne cessity, his Reputation abroad, by making Merchandize of peace, and warre, as his last refuge; so leaving his old Allies became enforced to betake himselfe to persons doubtfull, or in jured, and that by giving over him selfe to a sensuall security and re ferring all to base greedy and un worthy Ministers, whose Councels were ever more subtle then substan tiall, hee had throwne downe those pillars of soveraignety, and safety, Re putation abroad, and Reverence at home
Io. Tuxe ter, Mon. Bury. Hee now therefore making sweet nesse and clemency the entrances of his regained Rule for the faults of most of the late Rebels hee forgot, a gracious kind of pardoning, not to take knowledge of offences, others hee forgot, that they might live but to the glory of his goodnesse, Rot. Cart. 51.52. Hen. 3. for the fewer killed, the more remaines to adorne the Trophee
Tyrants shed bloud for pleasure, Kings for necessity, yet least his Iu stice and power might too much suf fer in his grace and mercy, some few hee punished by small fines, Claus. 52. H. 3. M. 29. some by banishment, as the two guiltlesse, yet unpittied Sonnes of the Arch-trai tour. Treason so hatefull is to the head, that it draweth (wee see in this,) the carriage of the innocent children into an everlasting suspect, and what is suspition in others is guilt in them: Vpon the constant followers of his broken fortunes hee bestowed, but with a more wary hand then before the forfeiture of his enemies: Immo derate liberality hee had found but a weake meanes to winne love, for it lost more in the gathering then it gai ned in the giving. This bounty be stowed without respect, was taken without grace ▪ discredited the recei ver and detracteth from the judge ment of the giver, and blunted the appetites of such, as carried their hopes out of vertue and service: Thus at last, Chron. Dunst. hee learned that reward and reprehension justly laid, doe ballance Government, and that it much im porteth a Prince, the hand to bee e quall that holdeth the scale
In himselfe, hee reformed his na turall errours, Princes manners, though a mute Law have more of life and vigour then those of letters, and though hee did sometimes touch upon the verge of vice, hee forbore ever after to enter the circle
His court wherein at this time, the • aults of great men did not onely by • pprobation, but Imitation receive true comfort, and authority; for their crimes now became examples, and customes, hee purged very judiciously and severely, since from thence pro ceeds either the regular or irregular condition of the Common state
Expence of house hee measureth by the just Rule of his proper reve new, Ordinat. author. Reg. aulae. Glaus. 53. Hen. 3. Rishanger. and was heard often to say, that his excesse of wast before had beene an issue of his Subjects bloud, the in solency of his Souldiers made law lesse by the late liberties of Civill armes, hee spendeth in forraigne ex pedition. Having seene that the quiet Spirits underwent all the former Ca lamities, and the other never were sa tisfied but in the misery of Innocents, and would, if they had no enemies abroad seeke out at home, as they had done before
The rigour and corruption of his judiciall Officers hee examineth, Pat. 53. and 54. Hen. 3. Comment. de Trail. b • ston. and redresseth by strict Commis sion; For the sence of their severi ty, became a murmure of his owne cruelty
The seats of Iudgement and Coun cell, hee filled up with men nobly borne. For such attract with l • sse of fence, the Generous spirits to respect and reverence. Their Abilities hee measureth not by favour, or by Private Information, as before, but by publike voice, for every man in particular may deceive and bee deceived, but no man can deceive all, nor all one
And to discover now his owne Capacity, and what part hee meaneth to beare hereafter in all deliberate Expeditions, hee sitteth himselfe in Councell dayly, and disposeth affaires of most weight in his owne person. For Councellours bee they never so wise or worthy, are but as accessa ries, not principals, in sustentation of the State; their Office must bee subjection, not fellowship, in con siderations of moment, and to have ability to advise, not authority to re solve
For as to live, the Prince must have a particular soule so to rule his proper and interne Councell; without the one hee can never bee truly man, without the other, hee shall never bee securely a Prince; for it offendeth as well the Minister of (merit) as the people to force obedience to one un capable of his owne greatnesse, or un worthy of his fortunes. This won derfull change to the generall State (so hopelesse lately to recover her former liberty, they sought now for nothing but the mildest servitude) brought them home againe with ad miration to his devotion and their owne duty
Hee that will lay (wee see) the foundation of greatnesse upon popu lar love, must give them ease and Iu stice, for they measure the bond of their obedience, by the good alwayes that they receive
Barth. Co • on. Chron. Norwic. This peace attended ever after his age and hearse, and hee happily li ved to fashion his Sonne and Suc cessour, and to make him Partner of his owne experience and authority; whose owne hard education training him from that intemperance, which makes men inferiour to beasts: framed him to affect glory, and vertue ▪ which made him superiour to men. So that all the Actions of his future Raigne were exact grounds of Discipline, and Policy; for his best successour to rule by after, who as hee was the first of his name since the Conquest, so was hee the first that setled the Law and State, deserving the Stile of Englands Iustinian, and freed this Kingdome from the wardship of the Peeres, shewing himselfe in all his Actions after, capable to Command not the Realme onely, but the whole World
Thus doe the wrongs of our Ene mies more then our owne discretions, make us sometimes both wise and for • unate
FINIS
