Canonical Title: THE HUMOROUS LOVERS
Requested Title: THE HUMOROUS LOVERS
Authors: William Cavendish, Duke of Newcastle
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-humorous-lovers_newcastle-william-caven_1677
Item Title: The humorous lovers. 1677
Item Creator: Newcastle, William Cavendish, duke of.
Item Year: 1677
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE HUMOROUS LOVERS
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-humorous-lovers_newcastle-william-caven_1677/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-humorous-lovers_newcastle-william-caven_1677_djvu.txt
608 
THE 


Humorous Lovers. 


ACT L | 
SCENE I. Covent Garden. 


— 


Enter Courtly and Boldman at ſeveral doors. 


Ow? inthe Melancholy Garb, thy Fa- 
ther is not dead, thou wou'd(t be glad 
of that, for the Land of Promiſe, an 
Heir is in the ſolitary Deſart, and wil» 

> derneſs of wants till then nor thy Mo- 

ther, that wou'd fave a Joynture; nor thy Sifters, nor Brothers, 
that would ſave portions; what's the cauſe? 
- Conrtly. Pritheeilet me alone. fig 
Bold. What, you have got a Clap again; I alwayes carry a 
Box of prevention Pills of Rhubarb, Caſſia and Turpentine, Me- 


Boldman. 


dicine for thy Body, I have none for-thy Soul 3 bur thou haſt - 


I ſee, tho do'ſt repent. 
Conrt. Prithee forbear. 


Bold. Then thou wer'r only Crank' laſt night, and art a lit- | 


tle fiek this morning ; take ſmall Beer, Milk or thin Broth to 
ſettle thy brains, and Faſt though thou can't not Pray. 

Court, 'Tis none of theſe that troybles'me; - + $54) 1 

Bold. Nay, then F know what its 3 \rhoazhaft} fat up all 
night at Play, and loſt thy ready money; nd'now-art droufie 
and penfive. . 08 ASWTYUNUISA 34 | 


Caurt. I wou'd it were no worſe, "IF I "W 


| *nque WOtrd'go oye fick'with thee, © 51717 1 5908 x 


ry B 


= 


”- 


> 
"RAE, F 4 
= $3S FS. 4 %. 3% 4 þ " 
2 = 8-4 P-” 36 wo +33 , ” E \ 4 , 
wh ' « : P << k g <3 28 F Y 
M6. KS un * BAS wh fo 35 ., pe "7 
"Is +. a Ao Te Bi © Hp i . F 6 3 , »# } 


(2) 


Court. Oh! Colonel, I am wounded, 

Bold. 'Sheart I'le go for a-Chirurgeon. 

Court. There's none can cure me: 

Bold. Is it mortal? let me ſee it. 

Court. You cannot, it is not to be ſeen, 

Bold. This is your leaping;,- and your running, you have 
broken a vein within you. 

Court.. Oh! 'tis a thouſand times more dangerous, the Lady 
Emilia (he has wounded me, 

Bold. Is ſhe a fixen ? will ſhe ſcratch and bite? an Amazo- 
nian Dame? | | 

Court. No, 't3s her beauty, that ſame ſubtle part 

Which. mortals cannot ſhun, has pierc't my heart. 

Bold. Faith I could never meet with ſuch a piercing beauty 

yet, and yet I love the Sex well. 


SINGS. 


[. 
T love the fat, I love the fair, 
The lean, that's nimble, full of airz 
T love the foul, IT love the brown, 
Both when they ſmile, and when they frown. 
; ft 


0; 
T love the black, T love the red 
Upon a Conch, or on a Bed : 

She that is dull, and will not fir, 
The aFive Wench too; T love her. 


. II. 
1 love the frolick, the preciſe, 
The reverend Lady, that is wiſe 3 
The Wife, the Maid, the Widow too, 
All that is Woman, and will Do. 


_ . Court; How ſtrangely you prophane the,name of Love! 
Bold.” Why ? ls there any ſuch thing as Love ia carnelt ? 
* "*- # Conrtly 


. 


- 
( #1 = £ 

Court. The very Beaſts inſtru thee 3 do they not Wooe, 
and chuſe their Mates? 

Bold. Well, there may be ſuch an evil then, but I have till 
been fo wiſe to prevent it, 

Conrt. How cou'd(t thou do it ? 

Bold. Why ? as I wou'd do thirſt, by drinking before [ am 
a dr 

om How extravagantly you talk, you never ſure heard 
of Love. 

Bold. Yes faith, I had a Kinſman was once in Love, and he 
told me a thouſand ridiculous ſtories of it, and repeated Ver- 
ſes, very fine ambling Verſes, that weat to the tune of Love 
and no Sence; and then I ſung, 

John Dory bought him an amblivg Nagg, 
To Paris for to ride a————— 
And he was ſtark mad at me. 

Court. He had reaſon. 

' Bold.. As little as ever | fqund in any Man; Love had done 
him that courteſie, 'tis ſuch a ſickly whining, and unmanly hu- 
mours; a Man is good for nothing while he has the fit upon 
him, can do nothing, or think of any thing but her, and her, 
and 'only her. 

Court. He is happy in that. 

Bold. As happy as the Deer, that loſes the pleaſure of the 
ſpacious Foreſt to be impal'd withio ſome private Park. 

Court. He is ſufficiently rewarded, for the loſs of that ſame 
brutiſh liberty when he enjoyes his Miſtreſs, and has the free- 
dome Love do's then altow. | 

Bold. Still worſe, and worſe; I fear the wedlock Ring more! 
than the Bear do's the Ring in his Noſe : Ob! the fortnent 
to be tied to the {take of Matrimony, and to be baited all the 
dayes of a Mans life by a Wife. 

"Court. Oh! the'pleafure of poſterity to live hereaſicd] tn our 
| hopeful ſine. 

Bold. Faith | have a very hopeful Progeny ſome where 3 
my Wife lies in, | for the moſt part in ſome ſtately Cage, and 
hath Lady Beggars to viſit her, and the whale Piariſh'is fo 
, kindy [ thank ow; to take care of our Off ſpring, and pre- 
| B 2 fer 


_ 


--- feraher> to: Charieable Hoſpirals, where they triamph- with: 
_their: Blew Coats and Horn Books. 
' 1 Court. You area very provident and indulpent Father. 
. . - Bold. Faith ſo I am, all things confidered, I was at the 
charge of half a Crown to get: the Varlets, and that's ſome- 
thing as Rents go now adayes. 
Court. [have too long delaid my happineſs, farewel]. 
. Bold. It were'pretty ſport to go, and ſee thee fool away an 
hour or two. . 
Court. T'know you dare not. 
| © Bold. *Tis-not-goad+ to tempt providence 5: we ſhou'd not 
ran into unneceſfary dangers: 
; Court. I thought-you had been;more confident of your con- 
ſtitution. on NINE £ | 
Bold. Faith, I am fleſh and blood, I carry the circumſtances 
about me, a-heart and members very apt to rebel; but I-hope 
F{halt have the grace to continue ſtedfaſt. ** 
- "Odourt. You will 'be a welcome Man, they are acquainted 
with: your humour, and have a great delire.to ſee you, there 
is& brisk. Widow, the Lady Pleaſant, who will be ready to im- 
_ ploy you, while I (hall be engaged elſewhere. 
Bold. T have heard of this brave Widow, ſhe is witty, beau- 
tiful and cruel, they ſay, ingredients, which make up. a very 
impertinent Lady ; but finceT have ſaid it, I will be thy Se-_ 
cond-in-this Rancounter, and. behaye my ſelf like a Man of 
Honour, Y | 6 


s 


Enter gir Anthony Altalk.. 
Al: Colonel, your humble Servant. 
Bold.. Your Servant Sir. 
Al. *T1s like to prove a very-pleaſantevening, the Plays are 
ald-and-empty, the Company.will be in the Park anon. 
Bold. It may be fo, Sir. 
Ml. Fhave'ſat-out one tedious Atin hope of ſeeing my Mi- 
_ Gris. | | 
Bold: You are a deſerving Gallant, Sir. 
A; Eaith,ſhe'is very pretty, do not you think ſo? 


Bold. 


in 48 Eee one edt a Fac: PEEP no 
Sy 1 £5 OO ACRACE > 7 Es, 
* j IE 
' 
1 
| 
| 


Bold. I know her not, Sir. *s 

A. The Princes Peanthea'in the 
ried to day by Proxie tothe Prince Arbaces. 

Bold. What ! another acts her part.  . 

Al. You underſtand it well Sir,*who is that goes youder, 
Tom Brutiſſv e 


[ He goes at alittle diſtance, and looks as if he 
obſerved ſome body paſſing by. 
Court. Prithee, what Airy Coxcomb's this ? he prates; and 


combs his Perriwig ſo briſkly. 
Bold. I have ſeen him, but I know not well where.. 


Court. Tis-as pretty a faſhionable Fool, as a man ſhall ſee in- 


a Summers day, 


Al. Oh! my head Colonel, when ſhall I be able to fin with-, 
out repentance? we were at it again Jaſt night Beer-glafſes,. 
till ewo a clock in the morning) it was a ſhrowd bout we had 


at the Fleece Colonel, 

Bold. When? |I beſeech you, Sir. 

Al. Have you| forgotten me ? when I had the hana to be 
made acquainted| with you by Maſter $»arle and Maſter Brus 
tiſh, a conſtant and very good Guelt to that houſe, Sir. 

Bold. Sir Anthony altalk, 


Al. The very ſame, Sir; -I danced a Jig while Tom Bratiſh 


whiſtled, and play'd upon the head of a pint pot, for your bets 
ter remembrance, Sir. 

Bold. I blame my memory, Sir, and beg your pardon. 

Al. I had e'ne|like to have been drawn in again to day by 
Jack Whifle, and Nick: Scoundrel, very honeſt but debauch'd : 
Fellows, they are at it- pell mel , at a new Foundation in 
Bloomibyry. | 

Court. Prithee! ſhake off this Cater-piller, and let us be go- 
ing. 


\ know you vifit the Ladies, take the air, &-c. 'a man of a tens 
der conſcience may truſt himſelf among you : 'tis too early 
for the Park yet, how ſhall we lofe an hour or two? - 
Bold. We have ſome buſineſs at preſent, that will Snduchily: 
winder us of your good company. al! wy 


Al. You are wig of more virtuous inclinations, I: 


| 
| 
| 


and no King, f es is | mar- | 


(6) 
Al. It is not of conſequegce? 
Conrt. Of very great confequence, Sir. 

Al. It cannot hold you long? 

Court. All this Afternoon, Sir. 

Al. Which way do's it lead you ? 

Conrt. Which way have you a mind to go, Sir ? 
_ At. Nay, faith, I am very indifferent. 

Court. How the Devil ſhall we be rid of him? 

Bold. Sir anthony, your very humble Servant ; this Gentle- 
man and I muſt walk a turn or two, and piveney diſcourſe 
our bulineſs. 

Al. I aman idle man, Colonel, and can wait your leiſure. 

[Walks at 4 "diſtance ſhaking his Ribands, 
and combing his Perriwig. 

Court. Did'ſt thou never ſee him but once, ſay'it thou ? 

Bold. Never but that once, at the Fleece, in the company of 
Snarle and Brutiſh, where he danced the Jig he ſpoke of, and 
tir'd-us with the repetition of Copies of Verſes, which he had 
made upon ſundry occaſionsz there was one I remember as 
long as a Taylors Bill, a moſt doletull Elegy, upon the wiſper- 
ing of his Miſtris's Noſegay. 

Court, I worider at his impudence ! 

"Bold. *Tis his nature to be acquainted with all men, and in 
love with all women at firſt fight, 

Conrt. Snarle and Brutiſſ knew how to manage him, 

Bold. He is only tolerable among ſuch as have defigns upon 
him, Brut; (wore if they could but break him of this dama'd 
humour of affeQting ſuch a general acquaintance, they knew 
his Eſtate, and his underſtanding ſo well, they would not let 
him at 4ool. a year communibus annis. 

Court. They are as jealous of a bubble, as a Man is of his 
Miltris. 

Bold. They have alin he 1s their Miſtris, and cheatiog 
1s their pleaſure, 


[ Sir Anthony ſteps ont. 
Court. See, he is buſie with the Fruit- Women. 
Bold. Cheapning ſmall Nuts or Pipins: 
Conrt. Now is our time, let us away. | 
[_Exennt. [ Enter 


— 


- 


(7) 


Enter Sir Anthony again. 


Al. What, they are gone 3- why ? what the Devil is in me, 
or. what the Devil have I done that men ſhou'd ſhun my com- 
pany thus? I am wel] enough ſerved, I muſt change my 
Lodging from Fleet-ſireet into Covent Garden, deſpiſe my old 
acquaintance the Guelts, nay, for their conſtancy I may almoſt 
fay, the inhabitants of the Cock, and Chiza Alehouſe, where 
my Wit was admired, -and my perſon cheriſhed, to aſſociate 
my ſelf with the. Wits 2nd Braves of Covert Garden 3 happy 
was he then that had my countenance, that cou'd have the 
reputation to ſit next me at a Play, or have the honour to 
club with me for a Hackney to the Park; here Iameglad if F 
can hire men to keep me company, I pay reckonings for this 
man, and paſs my word for a debt for that man; Nay, thoſe 
Sons of Honour and Diforder, 8narle and Brutiſh have often. 
refuſed to. hear me. repeat my Verſes, without I wauld agree 
to be cheated at Dice afterwards : Oh the jaiquity, the ini- 
quity of this place. 

[ Exit. 


SCE N T 11-4 Dyning Room, 
Enter Emilia and Tatle her. Woman. . | 


Emilia. Tatle. 

Tatle. Madam. | 

Emilia. You have loſt your. tongue of late, you are grown 
ſo wonderous ſad and filent. 

Tatle, Ah Madam, theſe Hiſtories will quite undo me, I have 
ſuch a compaſſionate Nature, I am ſo concern'd for the misfor-- 
tunes of the generous Conſtance. 

Emil. Prithee forget thy Romances, and tell me thy Opini-- 
on of my Lover, 


Tatle. Maſter Coxurtly poor Mortal, he ſcarce deſerves the - 
name of a Lover, 


Emil.” 


(8) | 

Emil. Compar'd to the Great Conſtance or Pharamond, he 
never conquecr'd Kingdoms, nor routed'Armies with his (in- 
gle valour. 

Tatle. :Never ſo much as broke a Launce to maintain your 
beauty, he dares not run-a Tilt without it be at a waiting 
Woman, I warrant him; I know not how you have alter'd 
him, but he was a meer Reprobate, I am ſure when [ had the 
honour to belong to my Lady Stately,- he was a pretender, 
there, . but broke off unhandſomly, and ſaid it was with Lo- 
vers in this great Town, as with a Paek of Dogs in a Hare- 
Warren, they change fo often it was impoſſible to drive it 
home to Matrimony 3 .he call'd his Love a difeafſe, and not a 
happineſs, and often tempted my honour, ſwearing, my Lady 
let the diſtemper grow ſo ſtrong upon him, he'could live no 
longer without ſome ra_ Medicines. My Loy Pleaſant, 
Madam. 


Enter Lady Pleaſant, 


Wid. What ! no Maſter Coxrtly yet, indeed he is to blame 
to-let you paſs away the time ſo ſadly. 

[ Exit Tatle. 

Emil. Some lucky occaſion. excuſes me the trouble he uſes 
to give me. 

Wid. And you are as glad to,be excuſed that trouble, as 
Landlords are (when the Tenants miſs their quarter day) to 
be excuſed the telling of the money. 

Emil. | hate the repetition of the ſame (ad ſtory, I had ra- 
ther hear a Play in Rime thrice over. 

id. Nay, | know you hate his Company, as you doablack 
Ace at Umbre. 

_ Emil. The ſmall encouragement he receives gives you but 
little reaſon to believe this. 

Wid. We are naturally apt to ſeem to ſleight that which we 
moſt eſteem; and in love, like little wantons when they play, 
we give a ſecret look, and run away to ſee how earneltly our 
Lovers will purſue to catoh us; 


Enter 


/ | 


(s) Won. 


Exter Tatle. 
Tatle to  daiſtel Miſtris Hood, my Miſtris's old School- 


Widow. Miſtris is without, and defires to ſpeak with you. 
| id. Bring her in, | hear ſhe is become a Match- maker of 
ate. 

[ Exit Tatle. 

Emil. It is a very reverend Calling, and well becoming her 
years, but 'tis ſo bordering upon ſcandal. 


Enter Hood and Tatle. 


IWid. The World is too cenſorious. 

Hood. Save you good Madam, and you my dear Miſtris. 

Emil. | am glad to ſee you Miſtris Hood. 

Wid. You have not beer ſo kind this great while, - 

Hood. It is not for want of due reſpect, I aſſure you Ma- 
dam, but I have had ſo much buſineſs 1 

. Vid, How do's your pretty Countrey Scholar, Miſtris Da- 
meris ? 

Hood. Perpetually talking of your Ladiſhip, fince ſhe had 
the honour to ſee you ſhe is very towardly, and apt, both for 
precept and example. : 

Wid. Pray bring her along with you the next time you 
come, [ like her company, ſhe makes is merry. 

Hood. Your Ladiſhip loves to be made merry, which made 
me ſo bold, to come and wait upon you now, to let you know 
there is a very wealthy Gentleman, one Mr. Fxrrs, that has 
committed his Eſtate and Perſon to my diſcretion. 

Wid. He has done very wiſcly. 

_  Tath. I have heard of him, Madam, they ſay he wears ſuch 
a Turbant of Night-caps, that he is almoſt as tall as Grantham 
ſteeple, ſo many Furs and quilted Garments, that in a ſiege he 
might ſerve toſtop a breach, and dead a Cannon bullet. 

Wid. Well ſaid Tatle. 

Tatle. He fell once in Jove with a Gentlewoman of my ac- 
quaintance for wearing a muff alittle out of ſeaſon. 

« Hood. Indeed Madam, he is ſomething old, and of a tender 
conſtitution, loves togo warm, he will occaſion mich poger, 
C : i 


" | (to). 


i your Ladiſhip pleaſes to admit him, he has heard me men- 
Gon your Ladifſhip, and is very earneſt to have the honour to 
wait upon you. 

Emil. Prithee Couſin let us have a ſight of this Monſter. 

Wid. We will, andto make the Scene the pleaſanter, I will 
receive him in my Sables, and fur'd Mantle. | 

Hood. Moſt excellent Madam. 


| Tatle. A Dutch Stove would make him a moſt paſſionate FU 


ver. Enter a Servant. 

Serv. Madam, Mr. Courtly and another Gentleman are come 
to wait upon you. 

Emil. Well. 

Hood. I take my leave of your Ladiſhips at preſent. 

Wid. Godb'wie, Miſtris Hood be ſure you bring him. 

Emil. Godb wie Miſtris Hood. 

Hoed. Your Servant Madam, your Servant Madam, I will 
not fail indeed. 

Emil. Let us withdraw a while. 

Wid. Tor wou'd be thought now wonderful diſcreet, 

To make him wait, you fain would run to meet. 


ACT Il. 
SCENE I Dyning Room. 


Enter Courtly aud Boldman, 


Bold. Etus be gon, I had rather have buſineſs with a great 

IB Man at Court, and no money to recommend me 
to him, than have any thing to do with theſe Women; what a 
tedious time have we waited here! 

Court, Have patience man, you have ſtaid as long e'renow, 
before the good old well-meaning Gentlewoman has procur'd 
Miſtris 8x/a. | | 

Bold. Had'ſt thou not been idle, and omitted thy daily vx 
fits to Doll, and Syſt, the Devil had never gained ſo much 
power over thee 3 prithce let us be gone. Court. 


* 


(tr) 

Court. Prithee have a little more patience. 

Bold. *Death, might we fall to it, it were ſomething, but 
to wait like Serving-men, till we ſee a dainty Banquet ſerv'd 
up, and not to have the freedom of eating, nay, aot of taſt- 
ing 3 I ſay let us be gone. 

Enter Tatle. 

Court, Oh! oh! here comes the firſt courſe. 

Bold. There is certainly ſome antipathy in my Nature, I 
find I ſhall not be able to brook the company of an honeſt 
woman. ; : 

Courtlyy} Well, well, Enemy, you whoſe fingers every day 

to ws help to undo me : by Heaven I mult have ſatis- 
faction Girle. 

Tatle. Lord Maſter Conrtly, you are ſo wonderous trouble- 
ſome. | 

Court. Lord Miltris Tetle you are ſo wonderous tempting. 

Tatle, Nay, piſh, what mean you? | 

Bold. Can you be angry Miſtris, when a Gentleman offers 
you the civility of his body ? 

Tatle. Such a Gentleman as you, Sir. | 

Bold. Well, pray Miſtris Pert, has your Lady new ſet her 
Lecks, removed her patches, ſcoured her teeth, and put on a 
pair of clean white gloves yet? I beſeech you inform us. 

Tatle. She only ſtays to conſult a little with her Dreſſer, to 
give ſome direCtions to her Milliner, and then ſhe intends to 
come her ſelf; in the mean time ſhe thought fit to ſend me to 
laugh at you, Sir. ; 

Bold. Who the Devil wou'd have to do with ſuch Cattle ? 
you are a happy man, Coxrtly / 


Enter Emilia awd the Widow. 


Court. Here ſhe comes, look Boldwan, and be loſt as I aw, 
it is as impoſſible to ſee her and not to love her, as to approach 
a raging fire, and be infealible of heat : Death, thou art ga- 
Zing on the Eaſtern Wench in the Arras. 

Court. Your humble Servant, Ladies. 

Ladies. Your Servant, Sir, tf) ” | 

C 2 | . Emil. 


(12) 

Emil. What have you brought to ſhew us here ? 

Court. The Colonel we uſed to talk of. 

Emil. He ſtares, and looks up and down, like a Cat that is 
carried to a ſtrange houſe, and newly ſet out of a baſket. 

_ . Wid. He thinks we have beſet him ſure, and is contriving 

ſome convenient way to eſcape us, I will try if the fright has 
left him wit enough to make a reaſonable anſwer : You look 
as if you did not like the Company, Sir. 

Bold. Indeed, Madam, though I ſhall ſcarce believe you an- 
other time, I dare ſwear you have ſpuke a very great truth 
now. 

Conrtly to) My darker thoughts are vaniſhed, there is no 

Emilia, {night where you appear, it is perpetual day with 
me. 

Apollo lights his Taper at your ejes 
When you awake, when ſleep his bright flame dies. 

Bold. What language is this Madam ? the Devil take me if 
I know what it is. | 

Wid. It is Lovers language, Sir. 

Bold. Do they keep Grammar: Schools to teach it, Madam ? 
Ptay let us hear ſome more on't. 

Emil. Shou'd it be true! 

Tou alwayes lov'd your liberty ſo well, 
Yonr heart will ſoon be tempted to rebel. | 

Court. Princes, when once their SubjeFs hearts they gain, 

Free from Rebellion, may ſecurely Reign. 

Emil. But love his Empire never can ſecure, 

Since that deflroy's it, which ſhou'd make it ſure. 

Bold. Very pretty i'faith, it has a touch here and there of 
Engliſh; I wou'd you cou'd make me underſtand it, Madam. 

tid. You Soldiers have a rougher dialett. 

Bold. It has a milder ſound indeed, than Stand, turn to the 
right, to the left, double your files, preſent, give fire ; how do. 
you like this, Madam ? | 
 Wid. You (ce that I do not quake at the dreadful ſound, 
Sir. | 
Bold. Nay, then fince you are ſo valiant, I will entertain you 
with a martial ſtory ; ſhall it be of a fiege, or of a pitch'd bat- 
tle, you ſhall have your choice, Lady. | Wid. 


(13) 
rid. Of neither, I beſeech you, Sir. Y 
Bold. Nay, faith then you may entertain your (elf for me. 
Wid. Why, put the caſe Colonel a Lady ſhou'd love you, 
what then? | 
Bold. What then? faith I think I know pretty well, what 
then, wou'd you would let me ſee ſuch a Lady, Madam, and 
ſhe ſhou'd ſoon inform you what then. ; 
Wid. And love you ſo deſperately to die for you'if you 
ſhou'd be cruel, and make no return of kindneſs to her ? 
Bold. Before a Lady ſhall die for me, ſhe ſhall have turns, 
and returns, and many a good turn, I afſure you but pray 
Madam be ſo kind to ſhow her me, good faith you injure the 
Lady very much to conceal her. 
tid. Stand behind me, and I will ſhew her you. 
| [_ He looks in a Glaſs. 
Bold. It is your ſelf Madam. 
wid. Why, ſay it ſhould bel. 
Bold. Nay, faith I will (wear it, if you wou'd have me, 
Wid. What wou'd you give upon that condition ? 
Bold. Give! why I wou'd for a ſeaſon give over wenching 
upon that candition. 
wid. And drinking too? 
| Bold. Nay, hold there, all ſudden alterations are dangerous ; 
we ſhould give over deadly fins by little and little, for fear of 
the worſt. 
WWid. You will have an ill opinion of my freedom now. 
Bold. Do you think me fuch a manner of man? 
. Wid. Why then 'tis I that love you. 
Bold. | faith ! ; 
wid. Truly. 
B»ld. Nay, prithee ſwear it heartily. 
Wid. I have gone too far already, I fear they have over- 
heard us, | 
Bold. Let us withdraw, where we may talk with greater 
freedom, and faith I will believe thee there, 
Wid. But I fear you cannot love. again, | 
Bold. | was very lately of the ſame opinion my ſelf, butI 
fiad my mind begins to alter Madam 3 let me. (ce, loye me ! 
| [ He fludies. © © Conrtly 


p 


(14) 
® O 

Corrtly tot You cannot ſure be ſo unkind; though you can 

"Emilia, $ never love again, believe I love you : Debtors 
that never mean to pay, feldor diſown their Creditors, but 
Put them off a gentler way. - 

Emil, Well, fince you are fo reaſonable, 1 will not ſwear 
it 1s 1mpoſlible : ſee your friend the Colonel, how ſerious he 
ſtands yonder, and my Coufin behind him, laughing at him; 


.on my conſcience ſhe has conyerted the Infidel. 


Court, How now, lo ſtadious ! 

Bold. Faith know not, the Lady is a deſerving Lady. 

Court. Methinks you are a little diſcompoſed, Colonel. 

Bold. Thinking, thinking a littlez love me, ha, love me. 

Court. Ladies we keep you a little too long from taking 
*the pleaſure of the Evening : we ſhall meet you in the 2ul- 
berry Garden. 

Wid. Mark the Colonel. | 

Bold. JLove me! this is like to prove a very lucky viſit ; 
#0 himſelf. <ſhe 1s handſome, and of a very good humour, and 
make me thankful for it, I am of a very good and ſtrong con- 
ſtitution. 
bk wh Come Colonel, what's the matter man? 

Bold. You hall know hereafter. 

Men. Your Servant Ladies. 

Ladies. Your Servant Gentlemen. 

[ Exennt Men. 

WWid. laughs. Ha, ha, ha! | 

Emil. What's the matter Couſin ? 

FWid. Come in, come in, and I will tel] thee, we ſhall have 


admirable ſport in the Mulberry Garden. 
| [ Exeunt. 


SCENE II. A Dyning Koom. 


| Enter Furres and James. - 
Furres. My Chair, James my Chair, a Pilgrimage, a very 
Pilgrimage. Hy r 
amtes. Indeed Sir, it is a tedious journey between the Bed- 


chamber and'the Dyning room, every yard 1s a — 
ED wit 


(15) 


with you, but conſidering your fardle, your bundles of furs. 
and woollen : I cannot blame you. | 

Furrs, | am mightily diſtemper'd, ſuch a heat, 'tis my Li- 
ver fure| | 

James. You wou'd be beholden to Nature, for ſuch a com- 
fortable diſeaſe as a Fever. 

Furrs. Oh, hot, hot, James, hot | | 

James, Hot, Sir, why? you are a walking Hot-houſe, a 
meer Bath-ſtove, Sir, I proteſt you make me ſweat by. refle- 
tion, the very waiting on you makes me believel hve under 
torrida Zona, (ure 'tis not half ſo hot under the ZquineG@ial. 

Furrs. He 18a wile man that keeps himſelf warm, Jawes. 

James. By that rule you are the wiſe(t man in the world, 
Sir. 

Furrs, We ſhou'd defend our ſely2s againſt the injuries - 
of the weather, James. | 

Jamer. Again(t the injuries of the weather ? why, you in- 
jure the weather; Sir, your cloaths are able to affront 2ſ* 
covia, and put both the Poles out of countenance; were the 
Thames frozen over, your walking upon it wou'd thaw it pre- 
ſently 3 ſnow will melt before you, and yet you are afraid of 
cold (till. | F 

' Furrs. Away you Knave. 

James. Away ! I wou'd | were away, you are the ſweating 
Sickneſs tome, I have a troubleſome office of it, I am fain to- 
have common places for your cloaths to fortifie my memory, 
my head is a meer Wardrobe, full of nothing but Night-caps, 
Coats, Cloaks, Stockings, Furs, Drawers and Waſtcoats. 

Fur. Peace, thou art an idle Knave. 

James. 'Tis very likely I ſhould be fo, by that time I have 
made you ready, 'tis almoſt time to goto bed again, and then 
when I am pulling off your ſtockings I deſpair ever to ſee 
your naked leg, | | 

Furrs, What mutter you, Knave? , | 

James, Iam praying, Sir, for warm weather, that your W or- 
ſhip may not catch cold. , | 

Furrs. 'T was well done. James, 'twas very well done; Do 
you hear? ſee that the Coverlet hanging|be taken off of my 
head. 


| (16) 
head, that of King Nebuchadnezzar, for though he is a great 
oppreſſor, he is but cold, James, and inſtead of it, let there 
be a Feather-bed laid on, I will lie between two Feather-beds; 
the Germans are a wiſe People, and know how to preſerve 
themſelves, the world is beholden to them for the invention 
of that good and* wholeſome faſhion. | 

James. Will you be pleaſed, Sir, to have ſome Bezoar and 
Poſſer drink at night, or a little of my Lady Kerts powder, to 
help to make you ſweat ? b' | | 

Furrs. You prate Sirrah, you prate. 

James. On my conſcience he wou'd be content to have the - 
Pox, if it were but for the pleaſure of ſweating for it. 

-Farrs. Still muttering, hark ! who knocks there? open the 
door carefully. | | 
| Enter Miſiris Hood. 

James. It is Miſtris Hood, Sir, your Neighbour. 

 Farrs, Very well, good Miſtris Hood come near, come near, 
I ſay, but forbear your 'Fan, you will be railing of wind (till ; 
well, what News, what news, good woman? 

Mr Hood. Very comfortable News, Sir, the Lady is very 
much taken with -the deſcription I made of you, and highly 
-commends your prudence, Sir you have ſtrange charms about 
you, the very naming of you,' is able to warm a Ladies breaſt. 

Furrs, Very well, very well, what age is ſhe of? 

M1”4 Hood. Juſt in her meridian, and as warm as the Sun at 
Noon day. 

Furrs. Very good, and of a delicate complexion ? 

A419 Hood. She has a skin as white as the driven ſnow. 

Furrs. Forbear, forbear, thou wilt ruine her with ſuch an- 
other compariſon : how my blood is chil'd within me ! 

A1”' Hood. She has a'hand as ſoft, and as warm as wooll. 

Furrs, Very good. | 

M477 Hood. Her teeth are Oriental Pearl, her eyes as bright 
as ſtars are in a froſty night. 

Furrs. Again thou haſt froze the blood within me, 1 have 
cakes of ice floating in my veins. ;, | 

1444 Hood, Her breath is more ſweet and comfortable than 


the moak of incenſe. 
| Furrs. 


(17) 


Furrs. So, no more, no-more,: thou haſt thaw'd me-again 3 


James, let the Boys have waod to night to make bonefires to 
morrow; when the air has been well aired, I will venture my 
felf to go and ſee her : How do's the little Charge l truſt you 
with? | 6 

2418 Hood. Very well, Sir. = - 8 

Furrs. Are you careful in your inſtructions ? 

A1'* Hood. I read Behaviour to her daily, Sir. 
_ Furrs. Your Fan again! Farewel, farewel, thou wilt be the 
_ death of me ſome time or other 3 James, let her forth, and fol- 
tow me into my Bed-chamber, I fear ſhe has given me a fit of 
an Ague. F | 

. [ Exennt. 


SCENE III. The Mulberry Garden. | 


Enter Emilia, a»d the Widow Pleaſant. | 


Emil. They are not come from the Park yet.” 


Wid. They will miſs our Coach the next round, and quick» | 


ly hurry after. 

Emil. T wonder which is more impatient. . 

Wid. The Colonel], Ile warrant him hope rouſes Love and 
imps his wings.” h | 

Emil. 'Twas a ſtrange frolick ; take heed Wench you prove 
not like the Fly, V1 | 

Wid. I deſpiſe your old proverbial Saws, as even like. the 
Fly, and becauſe you have [ing'd your wings, you think I mult 
do ſo too; how my heart is ſet upon the exploit! be ſure you 
help me to vex him. ; 

Emil, | warrant thee, let us take the other walk. 

'/ rerk [ Exennt. 


Enter Courtly a#d Boldman poinder'd, &C. 


Bold. 'Tis a delicate plump Wench; now a blefling on the 
hearts of them that were the contrivers of this Garden; this 
Wilderneſs is the prettieſt convenient pjace'to waoe a Widow 
"165 * D Courtly. 


\ 


oy 


Conrt” You havethe luck: of it Colonel. 

Bol: "She made me ſwear a thouſand oaths —_—_ not tel! 
thee of it': if thou ſhou'd{t prove a Tatler now. 

Conrt. Have not I a hundred times truſted thee with buſt- 
nels of the like nature. 

Bold. Hold, there they come. 


Enter Emilia ad the Widow. 


Men. Your Servants, Ladies. 

Vid. You are men of honour I ſee, and dare keep your 
words, 

Emil. I did not think the Colonel had been ſuch a prodigal 
of his time, to trifle it thus away with Ladies, 

id. I fear he will repent it hereafter. 

Bold. I will repent nothing all my life, but that I had not 
the honour to know you ſooner, Madam. 

17id. Bleſs me! we are deceiv'd Coulin, this is not the Co« 
lone! we ſaw to day, he was a very free, well-humour'd Gen- 
tleman, and ſpoke his mind plainly ; this is ſome flattering 
Courtier. 

Bold. The change is great, Madam, G ace firſt you ſaw me 3 
but queſtion not your ſelf the miracles you'do. 

wid. Prithee Coulin let us ſtand a little further off, he 
makes my head ach worſe than a Milliners ſhop 3 foh, what a 
ſtink of Eſſences is here ! he has corrupted the very air with a 
new pair of Gloves. -- 

Bold. Pardon me Madam, if I cannot but TY 8 IRE? 
purſue: thus joyful Pilgrims fainting with ex- [Riſes ber ban 
celſive drought ſtoop and kiſs the _—_ that does retre(h 
their thirſty foals. - 


'Emil., Moſt Courtly. 
tid. Moſt Poetical too, it is the Colonel I ſee, but ſure he 


is not well-in mind, his inclinations alter like'the temper of our 
bodies in an Ague3 heis juſt now fallen into a hot fit 3 a ſpare 
diet, a'dark room, often letting blood in the forehead, under 
the tongue. 

"E*hil.- Fontanels, Purging by Hillebore , (weating by Cor- 


Cials, Wat. 


(to) 


wid. And a little {ſleep provoked by Lavdanunr, that rare 
preparation by a Learned Doctor at: Paris, may'in time allay 
the extravagant: vapours, and reconcile his wits'again: 

Bold. ſoftly Rarely well diſſembled, Widow, but prithee be 
to the Widow. Cnat tao tedious. 

id. Still madder and madder, out of one fit into'another, 
a touch of the old (train again 
Fe _ if TWhat the Devil ſhou'd be the meaning of this ? 

Emil. Why, put the caſe Colonel a Lady (hou'd love you, 
what then ? 

Bold. ſtarts.) Ha! | 

Wid. And love you ſo deſperately to die for you, 1f:you 
ſhou'd be cruel ? 

Bold. Are not you that kind Lady ? 

Wid. Are not you that ealie Gentleman that did believe ſo? 

Bold. And is it not ſo? 


-Wid. Alas, how can it be otherwile! what a graceful per. - 


{on he has, what a noble carriage, and what a piercing wit! 
[They all laugh at him. 

Bold. But do you hear, do you hear —_— you are wan- 
derous merry ? 

IWid. And wonderous loving too, Sir, are we not ? 

Court. Indeed Madam, you are to blame to inveigle a poor 
innocent young Gentleman thus. 

Bold. Conrtly hold your peace, or by Heaven I ſhait grow 
quarrelſom : jugling, jilting Women, live till you'are old, and 
grow ſo poor, that you may want money to buy paint. 

Emil, Loving ! s 

i/id. And Courtly Colonel. 

Bold. Peace Mandrake, may all the infirmities you hide light 
upon me, it I ſtay longer in your company. 

Wid. Nay, good kind Colonel. 

 [ They all laugh at him. 

Bold. Pretty well favour'd deceitful Utenſil, farewel, and 
the Devil take you all. 
| | [Exit Colonel. 
Emil. I am weary with laughing, _ | 

Wid. 


(20) | 

'Wid. What wou'd T give he loved me in earneſt, that I 

might have the pleaſure to-uſe him ſcurvily ? | = 
Court. Youare too great a Tyrant, Madam, 


Enter $ir Anthony Altalk, azd goes over the Stage. 


-<— **6 Tour humble Servant Sir. 
Coxrt. Your Servant Sir. | 
id. What pretty pert Gentleman is that, I ſee him always 

at the Plays, bowing to every one, running from one ſide of 

the Pit to another, and whiſpering for the moſt part with the 

Orange Women. 

Conrt. He is very jantee indeed, and of a humour now in 
faſhion 3 I learned his Name but this Afternoon. it is Sir 4-- 
thony Altalk. | | 

Emil. He makes pretty little Songs, and teaches them to 
Ladies 'Rimſelf. 

- id. Oh, I have heard of him, he invents Emblems for 

-Fans, and writes Epigrams upon every Bulk he lays his hands 


'On. 

Court. The very ſame. 

Wid. T wou'd give any thing to have his company an hour 
or two for variety ; he is another ſort of Foo] than I have met 
withal yet. 

Emil. Cou'd not you procure it us ? | 

Court. The buſineſs is not difficult I think, he is of a very 
ealie acceſs; but the trouble will be ta be rid of him after- 
wards. 

id. Leave that trouble to me. | 

_Conrt., Well then, I will endeavour to bring him to mor- 
Tow. 
Emil. The fir grows cold, let us be going. 
* Court. I will wait upon you to your Coach, Madam. - 
Wid. Pray beſpeak ſome Poetry of him to make us merry. 


Emil. He never goes unfurniſh'd (ure. 
RE] [ Exennt. 


Exte? 


(21) 
Enter Altalk. Ma TP 

Sir A»th. Not one man can [ faſten upon in this Garden, 
they all avoid me, freeneſs and good nature haye undone me, 
I will hereafter be more reſerved in my acquaifffance, 

Enter Courtly. | 

Court Sir Anthony, well met. 

Sir A:th. Your Servant, Sir. | j l - 

Court. Did you not meet the Colonel ? 

Sir 4th. Yes, but I care not if I never meet him more. 

Court, Why? what is the matter Sir Anthony? .. A 

Sir 4»th.* This is the matter, I civilly ſaluted him, and tol 
him it was ayvery fine Evening, and he told mel ly'd. 

Court. And what did you anſwer ? 

Sir Anth. Why, I told him I thought I did-ſo indeed, and 
there was an end of the buſineſs : What Ladies were thoſe you 
were talking with, Sir? | 

Court, How do you like them ? ; 

Sir 4nth. Lovely Women, I had a great mind to heye put 
in, and have made one, but I wanted aſſurance. 

Court, It is a great fault in a Courtier, they have a,very fair 
opinion of you I aſſure you; I am to morrow to give them 
an entertainment, in which you may do me a great favour. , 

Sir 4zth. You honour me too much, by. thiaking it withia 
my power to ſerve you. | 

Court. They are great Lovers of Poetry. 

Sir 4»th. *Tis very well. = 

Court. And I have borrow'd one of the Theaters to enter- 
tain them at 3 if we had but a Mask now, or ſome ſuchpretty 
Poetical thing. 

Sir 4th. A Mask ! ſtay Sir, upon what occaſion? +. 

Court. Why, be reveng'd on the Colonel, and uſe your ſkill 
to perſwade Yerx2, and her Son Cupid, to make him fall de- 
ſperately in love with one of thoſe Gentlewomen you ſaw with 
me; I will inform you which of them, and give you good rea- 
ſon for doing it. w- 

Sir 4th. Let me fee, let me fee, I think I 
have a blank Maſk upon the fame ſubject, I [He Conſiders. 
will home, and fill it up preſently :: Where ſhall we meer to 
- morrow? . | Courtly . 


(22) 
, Court. Wewlill agreeof i it as we'go, you ny] me infinite- 
e Y> 2142 

Sir 4th. AlasSir, a rifle, ſcarce worthy your acknowledg- 
ment. 

Court. You are too humble Sir, and value not your ſelf as 
you ſhou'd do. 

Sir Anth. You are too kind, and too obligiog Sir. 


[ Exeunt. 


_—_———_—_ - 


ACT II. 
SCENE I. A Chamber. 


we Enter Miſiris Hood and Dameris. 


Hood. Iſtris Damer#. 
Dam. Forlooth. 

Hood. Come nearer, come nearer, and be attentive to what 
T ſhall tell you : Your Friends have ſent you to me for your 
better Education. My Mother was a Waiting Gentlewoman 
'of the Mother of the Maids in Queen Elizabeth's time of. Fa- 
mous memory 3 it was, let me ſee, in the year of our Lord, __. 
by my truly I have forgot it, but T am ſare ſhe told me it was 
Leap Year, the Dominical Letter being P. for many were that 

7ear, I marry were th&y : But we are all fleſh and bivod, our 

randame For you know what ſhe did, 

Dam. Yes forſooth, ſhe lov'd an Apple. 

Hood. Ah, when things are forbidden it is a great tempta- 
tion; .well, on my confcience-we ſhall never be Vertuous till 
ſin be made lawful, 'and that, fome-ſay, will be after Doomſ- * 
day z but I am not learned | in thoſe things, therefore no more 
of them : Now to your Education 3 my proper Vocation, 
come nearer. 

Dee,” Yes forſooth. 

.,, Hood. Yes ſafſoorh i is too Conntrey like, ſay Madam, or 


RAE. withoat peaking, and then your Milk-maigs court '&. 
| a 


0993 

all of one ſide, as if you were-going todance a Derby/aire Horn- 
Pipe - What reverences there were in Queen Elizabeth's time ! 
you ſhou'd have a Lady go down fo leiſurely, and ſo low, 
they would be.under the Table; for I have heard of a Noble- 
man that aſked for ſuch a Lady, when the poor heart was all 
the while labouring in the civility, and at her reſurre&ion 
made his honour {tartz would have a mediocrity in yqur 
court'ly, not fo long as thoſe were, nor ſo ſhort as a. Die-dapper, 
thoſe careleſs Ducks ſhow rather ſcorn than reſpe&. 

Dar. | ſhall be careful to obſerve your direCtions. 

Hood. Well, and then your Gowns now a dayes are made 
ſo long, you loſe the advantage of a handſom foot, and leg; 
it was not ſo heretofore, wherefore be ſure you hold it up 
high when you go into a Coach, down ſtairs, or over the leaſt 
wet, it is a great provocation to a young Loyer, 

Dam. I ſhall be mindful. preps fan 

Hood. Well ſaid, then it is needful ſome time to pull off your 
Gloves jn publick places to ſhew your white hands, under pre- 
tence of ſetting your Locks or removing your: patches, give a 
careleſs look ſometimes to put a man in doubt whether it be 
chance or kindneſs, and if you find him coming, then is your 
time, be coy, hold off, and if he preſs your hand" ſeem-to be 
angry, but give him'gaod words again quickly, if he tread on 
your” foot at dinner, or at cards, take no natice of it, but pull 
It away, and tread on his again, as if it were by chance. 

Dar. I ſhall endeavour to remember. 

Hood. Very well 3 one thing more, when you are in a Coack 
together, upon the leaſt jog -ikreek, and catch hold of him, as 
if you were'afraid, though there be no danger 3 praftiſe and 
obſervation of other Ladies, when you are in company, will 
teach you a thouſand things very neceſſary for. young Wo- 
men. : 30 fe} 


Enter James. HESae 

James. My Maſter is at the door,; and prays you tomake 
haſte, leſt the wind ſhou'd riſe:  AxD 

Hood. We are coming, be mindful of this, Miſtris Dameris, 

you ſhall:know more hereafter, you ſhall go along withus, and 

vilit the Ladies to day. 14G: 122 toT ot 


D4ith 


'*- [hays : 
""Di2e.” I ſhall be very careful to obſerve your good diredi- 
your | 4a 0,4 9 -T" ESO. 


. Enter Courtly and $ir Anthony at oe door, Emilia 
and the Widow at another. 


Court. Ladies, your Servant, I have brought a Gentleman 
to wait upon you here, whoſe ingenuity you will have occa- 
fion to admire anon, . 

Sir Anthony kiſſes) Your faithful Servant Madam. [ To Emil. 

their hands. Your faithful Servant. [| To the Widow. 
This is an honour I have figh't for ſince I was yeſterday in the 
Mulberry Garden 3 Ladies you were the Glory of the Even- 
ing; the Walks had been but dull, had not your beauties ſhin'd 
there. 

IWid. We heard you were Poetical Sir, and doubted not but 
to be Stars at leaſt, when ever we ſhou'd ſee you. 

Sir 4th. Phebas himſelf. 

-Emil. Not a word of him now, I beſeech you, Sir, I know 
we ſhall have enough of him by and by in your Maſk. 

Sir 4th. I am his Prieſt Madam, and yet I will not flatter 
his Deity ſo much, to fay he may compare with you. 

rid. You are ſo'prophane Sir, I wonder he do's not puniſh 
you with leſs wit. | | 
| | Enter Tatle. 

Tat. Mr. Courtly your Footman waits below to ſpeak with 
you. h 

Court. T will kiſs your hands again immediately Ladies. 

[nn + | 108, [ Exit Courtly. 

Sir AnthonyTPrithee ſweet heart, which is The two Ladies 

to Tatle, Sthe Gentlemans Miſtris-that is $74lk together. 
gone down ? | 
 Tathe. Why ſhou'd you aſk, Sir? _ 
- .. Sir Anth, Iam deſperately in love with the' other. 
Tat. Then you know which Sir. | 
Sir Auth, Pox on't, what a dunce am I. -* [ Aſide, 


. Yes, yes, it.is that Lady, is it not? [Pointing tothe Widow. 
Tatle. You are right Sir. | [ He goes to Emil. 


Wid. 


(25) 
id. What is the matter Girle ? | F Tatle laxghs. 
Tatle. Tle tell you Madam. [ They whiſper and laugh. 

_ Sir A4#th, JI loſt it laſt night in the Mulberry Garden Ma- 
to Emilia. + dam, and I have no hopes of finding it again, 
but here. 
Emil. Your heart is worth but little ſure, you are fo care- 
leſs of it. 
Enter Courtly. 
Sir Anth. It was of no value Madam, before you ſtamp'd 
your Image there, but now it is no trifle. 
Court. How now Sir Anthony, making Love to my Miſtris ? 
Sir Anth. Is this your Miſtris, Sir? 
Court. This is the Lady Sir, I told you I eſteem'd above the 
reſt of Women-kind. ; 
Sir 4»th. A thouſand times | ask your pardon, Sir. 
Tatle. Sure this is the Lady Sir, you are fo deſperately in 

Love withal; 1s it not? [ Pointing to the Widow. 
Sir A»th, Now do l want the confidence t9 (ſpeak to the 

other : This Caudle-maker has undone me quite ! 

[Exit Tatle. 
id. Come Sir, the miſtake is pardonable, Travellers may 
be put out of their way through the malice of a Guide. 

Sir Anth. The Devil take me Madam, it I did not mean 
you, and was as glad it happen'd to be a miſtake as cou'd be. 
Emil. T hope you believe Sir, I have not your heart now. 
Six 4nth. Excuſe me Madam; when things are loſt the in- 
nocent are ſometimes apprehended upon. ſuſpicion :, I knew 

the T hief was not unlike you, 'tis your fair Relation here. 

. Vid. If I ſhou'd plead guilty, Sir, I hope you wou'd be plea- 

{cd to uſe me favourably. 

Sir A-th. Alas! I am your Priſoner Madam, I mult ſue to 
you for favour, and your goodneſs. 
Enter Tatle, 
Tatle. Madam, Madam, the Colonel is newly alighted at the 
door : Sir, this Lady is the Colonels Miſtris. 
Sir Anth. Pox on't, what will become of me now, wou'd 


Z - Women bad Bills upon them like Lodgings, that we.may know 


when they are to be Let. Ladies I will go before and wait, 
for you at the Theatre, E Wid. 


(26) 
wid. Sir Anthony, Sir Anthony, you muſt not go before us. 
Emil. This will give us reaſon to ſufpe& all you have ſaid. 
id. But you are not the firſt falſe man that has flatter'd 

Women to believe what has undone 'em. 

Sir Anth. Some things of conſequence concerning the Mask, 
which I had omitted, muſt needs procure my pardon Your 
Servant Ladies: 'Death, they had a mind to have me beaten 
ſure. | [ Exit. 


Enter Colonel, walks up and down Melancholy. 


Court. How'in the melancholy Garb Colonel ! thy Father is 
not dead. 

Bold. Courtly forbear, or I ſhall forget our Friendſhip. 

Court. Why, what is the matter man? 

Bold. That Devil there do's polleſs me, no exorciſm can 
remove her, Winenor Women ſignifie nothing, ſhe runs in my 
mind like ſmall beer when I had a Fever. 

Court. Thou art a moſt miſerable man then); ſhe is the great- 
eſt tyrant of her Sex. 

Bold. Do. you hear Madam, did not you tell me you lov'd 
me ? 

wid. You Sir! I remember I once ſaw a pretty Gentleman 
that had a very witty faculty of railing againſt Love, and ho- 
neſt Women, to whom I ſpoke ſomething to that purpoſe; 
he was not altogether unlike a Gentleman I ſaw fince in 1ul- 
berry Garden, and has ſome little reſemblance of your ſelf too, 
bur he is of a far more gay and manly temper. 

Bold. Why , put the caſe a Gentleman ſhou'd be 1a love 
with you Lady, what then? 

wid. Why, then 1 ſhou'd laugh at him Colonel, wou'd you 
would but do him the favour to let me know him; truly you 
iojure the Gentleman much to conceal him. 

Bold. Since you reſolve to treat him ſo honourably, I ſhall 
take care he ſhall wait upon you very ſuddenly ; and fo fare- 
well fair Hypocrite. ; : 
[ Exit Colonel. 7 


Emil. On my Conſcience he loves in earneſt. 


Court. 


(27) 

Court. There is no more defence againſt Beauty than againſt 
Spirits3 courage and reſolution ſerve for nothing. 

Emil. How earneſtly he look'd upan her | 

Court. And how unwillingly his legs convey'd him from the 
Chamber, as if every (tep they had expected new orders. 

Erter Hood. 
Wid, Oh ! here come tydings of a freſh Servant, what news 


. Miſtris Hood 2 


Hood. Madam, the party 1s below, and it pleaſe you. 

IVid. Dear Coulin, what ſhall we do with him, 'tis time ta 
g0 to the maſk ? . 

Emil. Wou'd Miſtris Hood could perſwade him to go along 
with us, and Sir Anthony ſhall invent ſame Poetical affliction 
for him. 

Wid. It wou'd do rarely, do you hear Miſtris Hood #2 

| [ They whiſper. 

Court, Who is it pray Madam ? 

Emil. We will tell you as we go. 

Hood. T ſhall do my endeavour Madarr, 

Vid. We (hall be ready there to receive you : Come let 
us be going. 

[ Fxennt, 


The SCENE, the Theatre. 
Enter Sir Anthony, Two IVoren Þljers. 


Sir 4th, You are perfect in your parts, 

I. Player. Yes. | 

Sir 4th, You ſing the Songs. 

2. Plizer. Yes Sir. 

Sir 4nth. Yog have an Angelical Voice, and deferve good 
Ones. 

2. P!1zer. But we ſo ſeldom get them Sir. 

Sir Anth. What ſhou'd bethe reaſon of it ? 

r. Plazer. The Poets now a dayes are very ſparing of their 
wit that way, they keep it all for Plays, 

2. Plzyer, Nay, and there. they are cxceeding ſparing too. 

£3 | I. Player. 


(25) 

1+. Player. It 1s a very ſcarce Commodity, never:was there 
leſs ready Wit ſtirring. » 

Enter 4 Servant. | 

Serv. The Company is come, bleſs me! they had like to _ 
have frighted:me witha man dreſs'd up-like aGyant in a Pup» 
pit ſhow. 

Sir Anth. Quickly, Chairs, Chairs. 


Exter Courtly, Emilia, Widow, Furrs, Hood, 
Dameris, Tatle, ad James. 


Court. SO Sir Anthony, | hope every thing is ready to divert 
the Ladies. | 

Sir 4Anth. Heaven! what walking Pyramid is that ? 

Emil. Oh! hark you Sir Anthony. [They whiſper. 

Fid.- Come Sir, will you fit down ? 

Furrs. With all my heart Lady ; I did not think the wea- 
ther had been ſa warm abroad, never truſt me if I do not 
{weat; James, my Hendkerchief. 

 Wid. It is ſtirring, more than ordinary motion will occaſi- 
on heat. 
k Fwarrs.. Nay, it is nothing elſe Lady, will you be pleaſed to 
t? 


- id. I ſhall ſit here, Sir. [ 4t a diſtance from Farrs. 
Court, You do well Madam: ; *Death, he ſmells worſe than a 
Chandlers Shop. [Emilia 2nd Courtly {it down. 


Sir 4nth. It ſhall be done Madam. Muſick begin. 
[ They play an Air. 
[ Exit Sir Anthony : After the Mulick has done he comes 
in again, and (its down by Courtly. 
The Maſk begins, Yezxusand Cupzd deſcending while the 
Song 1s linging. 


[, 
From their bright Celeſtial Sphear 
Venus 4nd her Son appear 
Gently deſcending to the earth, 
Ta give ous Laves a timely birth. 


It. In 


(29) 


IT. 
Iz the faires? Ladies eyer, 
Cupid's fatal Quiver lies; 
From them he borrow's all thoſe darts 
With which he wounds poor mortals hearts. 


BE. ; + 
And Man, alas, has no defence 
Againit an arrow taken thence : 
Loves ſweet inſeFion ſeizes all, 
The grief is Epidemical. 


Venus a#d Cupid are landed on the Stage, 


Venus. A Mortal's prayers, our Powers did move 
To make a rougher Soldier love 3 
Cupid imploy thy Magick Art 
T' infef his ſenſe, and wound his heart. 
[A Caldron boyling on the Stage. 


Cupid. Dear Mother, pow'rfall Charms T've got, 
A Lovers ſighs, Ven_—— put then ith pot. 
Cupid. His groans, ſad thoughts, and his deſpair, 
His ſoul departed, turn'd to air. 
Venus. Gently infus'd, wee'l boyl them all 
In tears, which his ſad eyes let fall. 
Cupid. But Lady Venus, #zy dear Mother, 
To makg_ it ſironger here's another, 
The Lovers feveriſh panting heart 
Blood that did backward ſtart - 
Cold ſweats breath'd through his porous " 
When to deſpair he did begin. 
Venus. Cupid, prithee my dear Son 
' Make what haſt thou can'ſt t ave done. 
Cupid. Here's a Bracelet of her hair, 
Beans that us d to flow ith air, 
Smiles that from her face did riſe, 
Glances ſhot from ber bright eyes 3 


Coral ::-* 


Venus. 


Venus. 


Cupid, 
Venus. 


Cupid. 


Venus. 


(30) 
Coral from her lips too, with 

Shaved Ivory from her teeth; 

From each vein a Violet, 

A Stramwberry from either tett, 

L ilies took from her white kin, 

Roſes from her cheeks 3 All's in, 

But the Pot methinks too narrow : 

Stir the ingredients with thine arrow. 

Thus Loves Oyntment we compound, 

In which we dip the darts that wound. 

Now Cupid ſhow thy Magick Art, 

And pierce that Mortals ſtubborn heart, , 

IWho did our ſacred power deſpiſe, 

Make him a ſlave to thoſe bright eJes. Pointing to the 
Ts this bis figure Cupid? thon can'ſ# tell - _ 

Tes. 'Tis the figure of the Colonel. 

Dip then thine arrow, pierce his breaſt { Cupid Aicks an 
While I take care to do the re?, (arton _ 
As this figure I do prick, 

Still in Love let him grow ſich. 

His eyes and ears thus I anoint, 

And put thoſe Senſes ont of joynt : 

No ſleep ſhall cloſe his wearied eyes, 


_ He ſtill ſhall languifh as he lies. * 


Cupid, 


Come now my Son repeat the ſpell 
That muſt inchant this Colonel, 


| The Conjuration SONG. 


I. 
By Lovers Circle I do raiſe thee, 
And by Love IT do amaze thee : 
Whatſoe're thou ſhalt rehearſe, 
Let thy Proſe be turn'd to Verſe. 


- 8 ge. 
Though ſhe's foul, yet think her ſair, 
And thongh earthy, light as air 3 
Though ill favonr'd in ber feature, 
There's no where ſo ſweet a Creature, 2. Thoueh 


Venus. 


Cupid. 


(31) 


Though ſhe be crooked, lame and halt, 
S$treight and ſound, without a fault 3 
Old, and never ſpeak a truth, 
Conſtant, and as freſh as youth. 


4+ 
Thus thou ſhalt alwayes be # th' wrong, 
And ſlill miſpraiſe her in each Song : 
Love's a diſeaſe, afſeFs the mind, 
And makes the underſtanding blind. 


Cupid, ow thou haſt made an end, 
Let us again to Heaven aſcend. 

But Mother, e're thy Doves take flight, 
To fhew that we have Conjur d right, 


"The ſoul of fome diſeaſed Lover 


Tn ſoft mnſick ſhall diſcover 
Thoſe various paſſions, new-born Love 
Do's in the Colonels boſome move. 


A SONG in the Muſick Room. 


Venns and Cupid Aſcending. 


With Loves fancied wings I fly 
In the pure and azure skie, 
In the ſerene air that's high, 


Viewing Planets as T goe, 
Their's are borrowed light, I know, 
Their Orbs for my lowe are too low. 


Fancy then did mount nie: higher, 
While the Sun that heavenly fire 
Did my brighter flame admire. 


Towring upwards feil fo far, 
' Till it became a fixed Star; 
And now governs Love and Wat. 


Conrt, 


engTe me into this* Tempeſt, let us be going, let us be going, 


(32) 

Conrt. Sir Anthony, indeed we have all reaſon to believe you 
a man of parts..' 

tid. Truly this 1s the prettieſt piece: of modern Poetry [ 
have ſeen, and I am much obliged to you Sir. 

Sir Anth. You are a favourable'/Lady 3 the'fancy of the 
Mask is ſomewhat new and extravagant I muſt confeſs, but 


:Poetica licentia will bear'it out now a dayes. 


Enter a Servant to Courtly. 
Court. Come Ladies, letus go up and reward his Muſe with 
Marmalet. 
Ew. We mult ſee another. flight yet firſt : Sir Anthony were 
you mindful? 
' Sir Anth. Madam, I have obey'd your commands, they are 


ready. 


Court. Sir Anthony, what mean you? Sic Anthony with a fwricch 
Sir A#th. Alittle more conjuring Sir. | \ © conjure. 
- Court. 'Bleſs us all! | 


Sir Anth. Ere to the Banquet we advance, 
T'le charm the winds into a dance 3 
From thy black and diſmal Caves, 
Aolus releaſe thy Slaves, "a 
And let them in a Dance appear. 
A Dance. 


Enter the four 7/ids with Bellows in their hands, 
and Dance about, and afflitt Farrs. 


The Winds. Lo! we are here, Lo! we are kere. 


Furrs, Oh murder! murder ! murder ! good Boreas forbear 
I beſeech thee, Hell and Furies are not ſo terrible as thele 
Monſters ! Gentlemen, Ladies, help me, help me, help me, let 
not me be thus untimely blaſted,'l beſeech you. 

Furrs. Oh | James, James, help me up, help mez why did'ſt 
thou not reſcue thy poor Maſter? 

James. Alas, Sir, the Wind was too ſtrong for me, I was 
blown off, there was no coming. near-you; ©: 

Furrs. Hood is a Varlet, a meardiffembling Varlet, ſhe did 


how 


ry 


=— (33) | 

how full of wind I am! they have blown me up | 

like a bladder; a cough already, the Alwced LHe ys. 
of my Ears are come down' too; Oh! I am loſt, I am loſt 
James, beyond the recovery of all my Blankets, Lamb-ſkins, 
and Night-caps, butter'd Ale and Sugar- candy, 

[ Exennt. 


ACT IV. 


Enter Sir Anthony and Dameris. 


Sir Anth.COO lately come out of the Ceuntrey Lady, you are 
| unacquainted with the Town yet 3 you have not 
ſeen the Court, the Park, the Mulberry, and the New Spring- 
Gardens, the Plays, the Balls, the Maſques, &'c. ' 
Dameris. I have ſeen nothing, Sir, but the Paradiſe in $hooe | 
Lane. 
Sir Anth, A trifle, a meer trifle, 


Enter Courtly, Emilia, Widow axd Hood. 


iid. How now Sir Anthony, you were miſtaken again, my 
hopes are loſt, that is the Lady you are ſo deſperately in love 
with, | 

Sir Anth, Love isblind, Madam, and very apt to theſe mi- 
ſtakes, WE 

IVid. There is a ſympathy in your underſtanding which may 
do much 3 Miſtris Dawmerzs is Poctical too. 

Enter Tatle. 

Tatle. Oh Madam! yonder comes the Colone), he looks fa 
wildly he frighted me, ſure he is diſtracted. 

Wid. Our jelting is like to come to earneſt then. 


F 


Enter the Colonel looking wildly, and a Servant. 


iid. Defend us all! .. | 
Col. Nay, fly not, but heir me, for you are the cauſe of all 
' 'my miſery, ſince you reſolve you will not love me, I will die, 
and then my Ghoſt ſhall haunt you. 
At Courfen time, and at the dead of night 
I will appear, thy conſtiows ſoul to fright, 
Make ſigns, and beckon thee my Ghost to follow 
To ſadder Groves, and Church: yards, where we'l hollow 
To darkgr Caves, and ſolitary Woods, 
To fatal Whirl- pools, and conſaming Floods 3 
T'le tempt thee to paſi by the unluckie Ewe 
i” _ Blaſted with curſed droppings of Mildew : 
Under an Oak that ne're bore leaf, my moans 
Shall there be told thee by the Mandrakes groans 3 
The winds ſhall ſighing tell thy cruelty, 
And how thy want of Love did murder me 3 
And when the Cock fhall crow, and day grow near, 
Then in a fliſh of fire T'le diſappear. 
[ Exit Col, 

Court. You fee Madam, to what extremity you have redu- 
ced the poor Colane]. 

Wid. It is all but counterfeit, it can be nothing elſe. 

Serv. | will allure you Madam, bis eye-lids never ſhut, he 
gives his cloaths no reſt, he is become a ſtranger to his Bed, 
food cannot find the way unto his mouth, he lives on (ſighs, 
and when he feaits he calls on you 3 but look where he comes 
again, 

p Enter Colonel unbutton'd, and like a Mad: mar. 


Wid. 1 vow his pgaltly looks affright me. 
[_Exennt Ladies tothe Balcony near the Stage. 


The Colonel takes chalk out of bit pocket, and makes a Circle, 


"Sift 47:th, What, are you going to conjure, Sir? 


Bald. 


he BE”. 
 Bold..You are an Aſs, I believe none of thoſe - Fopperies, 
where's their foundation,” the Devil? I could never,ſee him 
yet, I believe he is ſick in bed, andleaves mankind to his own - 
wickednefs. | Cl | 
Court: Why do you make this Circle then? | 
Bold, Why, I have found out a Myſtery, the great Mathe- 
' matical Secret, that has puzzl'd the greateſt Wits of the world 
ſo many hundred years. _ | E-, 
_ Sir 4nth, What's that ? | E | 
- Bold. The ſquaring of the Circle. we 3a 'Y 
Sir 4th. And what, whey 'tis ſquar'd? 
- Bold, Why, then 'tis ſquar'd. | 
Sir 4th. Nothing elſe? - , _— 
Bold. You ignorant, illiterate fellow, is not that enough > * 
Thou art no Son off Art : But where's my Miſtris 2 
IS: . - * [ He pulls out a Perſpe@ive-glaſs. 
. Oh yonder ſhe appears afar off, ſhe ſtands on Dover Cliff, and 
here I am on Calice Sands, I ſee her in my Perſpetive. 
Sir Anth. Is it Galileo's 2 <OIING 0 
Bold. He is an Aſs, I had it of a famous Capuchin;z had you - 
loſt a Pin in the Moon, I cou'd find it out with this Glaſs; bur | 
I will ſpeak to my Miſtris. | 
Bold. Can thy love for our meeting no way find 2 
Beſtride a Cloud, and ſail upon the wind, 
Or from our Dover Peer, that height ſo ſteep , 
Leap down into the boſome of the deep, 
A Sea- horſe ſhall be ready to convey 
Thee ſafely over all this waſhy way : 
But ſtay, T'le ſend to Neptune an Ambaſſage 
To lend bis Dolphin for thy ſafer paſſage. 
[| The Women withdraw from the Balcony. 
Ah! the day grows cloudy, and now [ cannot ſee her. - 
[ He turns round. 
Bold. Come Gentlemen, look you here, I have found out 
_ the Perpetual Motion, can make Mills go: without wind or 
water, or horſes; you ſhall not need winde up your Watches, 
your Coaches ſhall go without horſes, the whole world ſball 
run on wheels3 this is another oy of your graver __ > 
| 2 ider 


(36) 
lider wife men, but the day is clear'd again, fee where my Sun 
appear — [The Women appear again. 
' My dearei?, and my lovelie$t fair, 
Me thinks I tread the gentle air; 
Tle ſtraight to Phaebus, and will hire 
His gaudy Chariot lin'd with fire, 
To kiſs thy hands, and thee admire. 
The Planets ſhall upon me wait, 
Like Torches to increaſe my State 3 
The fixed S8tars ſhall not diſdain 
With their bright flames to ſerve my train, C 
My Trunks Ile ſend by Charles his Wain. 
[Wid. diſappears. 
W hat are you vaniſhed again? Then to my (ſtudy, Oh Geatle- 
men! take heed of my Glaſſes, this is my Alembick, and- [ 
want nothing of the Philoſophers Stone, but fixing the nim- 
ble God Mercyry, and giving him the right tinture of Sol: 
but by the. way, in my experiments, I haye found the rareſt 
Medicine in the world. ; 
Sir Anth. For whar, Sir? 
Bold. For Corns, Sir. | 
This is a grave and learned madneſs, and well becoming 
the wiſeſt men; but I muſt tomy Libratory, farewel Ignorance. 
[ Exit. 


Erter-Widow, Emilia, Hood, Damezris ad Tatle. 


Court. What think you now Madam, 1s this all counter- 
feited ? 

Emil. If it be, 'tis rarely. well done : your look betrays ſome- 
melancholy, Coufin. 

WWid. The Colonel does both abuſe himſelf and me; thiscan- 
not be real, and I am concern'd not for his madneſs but his folly ; 
but I am.to blame to. let ſo {light a matter trouble me : Miſtris 
Hood pray excuſe what has happen'd to Maſter Furrs, and per- 
fwade him to venture once more into our company, I will en- 
geavour to divert this idle humour. 

Sr Auth, Indeed Miſtris Dazeris, no Lady hasa more paſ- 

| ſjonate 


| (37) 
fionate ſervant, your native Excellencies need not the help of 
Art, you have ſtrength enough to conquer without thoſe Au- 
xiliaries. | 

Mrs. Dameris. I know not well what you mean Sir, but 1 
have been told, men are here ſo given to flattery, that' did*l 
underſtand you, I ſhou'd be apt to miſtruſt all.you have told 
me. | 
Hood. Miſtris Darmeris, come take your leave of the Ladies: 
Madam, I ſhall go immediately, and perform your commands. 

Mrs. Dameris. Your Servant Madam, your Servant Madam. 

iid. God by' pretty Miſtris Damerzs. | 

| [ Exexnt Hood and Dameris. 

Sir Anth, Farewel pretty innocence, * Daughter ® To himſelf. 
and ſole Heir ( as I am informed) of a wealthy Gentleman 3 
BU — 

Court. Come Sir Anthony, let us wait upon the Ladies to 
their Coach. 

Sir 4»th, I am proud of the Office, Sir. 

Wid. Mrs. Dameris has made you thoughtful $ir Anthony. 

Sir 4Anth. She cannot make me forget my duty to you Ma- 
dam. EE, [ Exennt All, 


SCENE IL. A Chamber. 


Enter Furrs and James. 


Furrs, Oh! James a Chair, a Chair, and throw a Blanket 
or two over me quickly, they are barbarous, inhumane, mer- 
cileſs people 3 I am afraid I ſhall never be my ſelf again, an- 
exceſſive cold James, an exceſlive cold. 

James. Have courage Sir, I warrantyou, you'l ſweat-it outs 
and be well again. 

Furrs, Doſt thou think fo? 
| James. I indeed Sir do, 

Furrs. Quickly, quickly James, provide ſome wooll to ſtop. 
my. ears, Lavender to ſtop my noſe, give me that warm hand- 
kerchief to hold before my mouth a while, and prepare the. 


ſarcenet to hang before mine eyes; Nature was improvident 
ta, 


> 
F 


(3s) 
to: make:ſo many holes about us: Haſt thou reached out the 
Spirits? 

James, Yes Sir. 

Furrs, Give me, give meſomein a warm Cop; "0 (He drinks, 
\Now give me the Key of my: Cabinet again : C ye takes it, and lets 
Oh Villam ! inconſiderate: Villain, thou wilt ; it fall again, 

be the death of me. - 

Janes. What's the matter,Sir ? 

Furrs. 'Oh the Key, the key, would'ſt thou offer to put a 
cold key into my hand? I feel the cold ſtrike upward, I have 
a cramp in my fingers, I ſhall have Convullion fits, immediate- 
ty ſome more Aqua Mirabilis, quick, quick, quick. 

James. Here. Sir, here. 

Furrs. So, it has met the cold humour, and difpers'd it 
hope l feel my ſelf better, a little better, be more careful b 

-other time Jeers. Haſt thou the Sarcener? 

James. Yes, SIr. 

Furrs. So then, put it before mine eyes. 

' James. Thus I ſtop theſe Cafements. 

Furrs. Thou doſt well James, why ſhou'i we be ſo fond of 
our fight? there is more ill-favour'd Women than handſome, 
more diſplealing objes than pleaſant 3 ſo 'tis well James. 

James. Here is the Lavender for your Noſe, Sir. 

Furrs. Stop, [top thoſe holes James, there are more ſtinks 
than ſweet ſmells. 

James. So Sirz I have laid your Noſe in Lavender. 

Furrs. No Knave,' you have laid the Lavender in py Noſe. 

James, Here 1s wooll for your Ears, Sir. 

Furrs. *Tis well, ſtop, ſtop theſe holes too, there is more 
diſcord than concord, more noiſe than muſick, more ill news 
to be heard than good; ſtop 'em ap, I ſay, and give me a PIP 

of Tobacco, and take away the handkerchief. 
| James. Here is a pipe Sir to {top your mouth. 

[ James ſtops his ears with-wooll, and hangs a piece of 
Sarcenet beſore his eyes, and puts @ pipe in his mouth. 

.-- Ferre, Tis well, Tobacco is warm and comfortable: what 
pains we take to preſerve our ſelves here 'a' while James ! 

. Death, Death James is che happteſt condition, 


Tamer, 


.* 
Fl 


WW WW. HW 


(39) 
James. By my troth Sir, I ſhall hardly be perſwaded to be 
of your mind. | | 

Furrs. Why James, (ſhou'd we live long, we ſhou'd grow 
weary of buttoning and unbuttoning our doublets, of eating 
our dinner and ſupper, Life 1s nothing but a dull repetition of 
the ſame things: What pleaſure doſt thou take James, to hay 
a new Sute once a year, againſt Chriſtmas or Eaſter? 

James. I by my troth dol, Sir. 

Furrs. And then 1n all thy bravery to dance a Horn-pipe, * 
and ſhow thy activity to the Chamber: maid. 

James. By my troth, I think well of it, Sir. 

Furrs. For my partT am weary of this World : the State, the- 
Greatneſs, and the Policy of this World, well look'd into- 
Jamez, are all but more ſerious Follies ; the ſame paſſions make 
Kings fall out, that make Boys goto Cuffs; all is folly, Jamez, 
a circulation of folly, we are al couzen'd with formality and 
ceremony, the Taylor and Cap-maker deceive us all James 3. 
but Death quits us of all theſe James; the quiet World is the 
Grave, James. 

James. [ like not that habitation Sir. | 

Furrs, Why, wou'dlt not thou deſire to be at reſt Jawes? 

James. Truly not I for all your Philoſophical pertwaſions..; 

Furrs. Truly Nature is fearful, Nature bids us preſerve our 
ſelves; but we do but injure our ſelves James, and ſtave off. 
our happineſs : Oh! Death, Death, James lay by my Pipe, 
hark ! hark! ſome body knocks at door, 
ſee, ſee, who is it James 2 but be careful, L994 Knocks here. 

James. It is your Neighbour Miftris Hood. 

Furrs. Let her avaunt, I will not ſee her James, ſhut her 
out, ſhut her out James. ; 

Hood. I muſt, and I will ſpeak with his Worſhip, I have bu- 
lineſs of conſequence to impart to him. 

James. Thou art a foe to his tenderneſs, thou art leſs we 
come to him than a'North-eaſt wind ; I ſay, begon, thou ſhalt 
not enter here, | 

Hood. Thou art a ſtinking, foul, unſavoury Raſcal, T muſt, _ 
and I will come in, I ſay. Y 
[They flrive, andthe door ſtands open. 


. 


h Furrs, 
4 


; | 2 
n , - 
kd 


(49) 
_ ©» Furri. Oh1 James, James the door, the door, the door, ſhe 
has let in wind enough to diſperſe a Navy 3 baſe, unworthy 
Woman. | 

Hood. Alas ! how does your Worſhip? I have been ſo much 
concerned for your health. 

Furrs, Thou art a Woman begon: impudence, and hypo- 
__—_ are natural to thee, thou wert the original of all my 
ev1l, 

* Hood. Heaven knows you wrong me, Sir, theie tears can 
witneſs my innocence. 

James. Oh Woman ! Woman! well, go thy wayes, if ſhe 
d&d not laugh ti}l ſhe crack'd the lace of her old Prunella 
Gown, whea ſhe faw him abuſed, there is no faith in a Ser- 
iIng-man. +- | | | 

Hood. Have Ito gain this 11] Opinion roſe early and late, 
when you have gotten the leaſt cold, to make you butter'd 
Alep#and Roſemary Poſſets, troak'd up the Almonds of your 
ears, and fetched up the pallat of your mouth again and a- 
gainz is this the reward of all my care and kindneſs? 

Furrs, Why, were not you an abettor, Hood? * 

Hood. You wou'd have thought me ſo, had you but ſeen 
the paſſion I was in, when the Villain laid the bellows to your 
Worſhips noſe, and blew, and blew, and (wore it was a fire- 
cole. 

Furrs, Who was the Author of that Villany then? was not 
the Lady Pleaſant in the Plot ? 

' Hood. Alas! poor Lady ſhe has kept her Chamber ever 
fince, and is now in the deepeſt meJancholy : No, no, Sir, it 
was the contrivance of a villainous, licentious Poet, Sir A4#- 
thony Altalk. 

Furrs. I will never be a friend to the Muſes again 3 Fumes 
pull down the Ballads my maid has ſtarch'd up in the Kitchio, 
add look mm my Study for the Garland of Good Will, and burn 
it, I will never have a good opinion of Rhyme more. But is 
the Lady melancholy ; doſt thou ſay > come -nearer good 

Neighbour Ho2d. | | | 

* Hood. Molt deſperately melancholy Sir. 

he Furrs, Upon my (core! | 


Hocg. 


(41) 

' Hood, I know not Sir, only ſhe ſigh'd, and figh'd a dozen 
times at leaſt, and charg'd mc to come and-inquire how. you 
did, and ſaid, Sir Anthony was a very unworthy perſon, and 
then fate down on her Cguch, and lean'd her cheek on her 
hand, and pray'd me to make haſte. 

Furrs, May [| believe you ? 

Hood. Think but how faithful I have been fince you truſted 
me with the ſecret of Miſtris Damerzs her birth, and how care- 
fall I have been of her Education, ever ſince ſhe came from. 
my. Siſter out of the Countrey. 

Furrs. Peace, peace, I was to blame to miſtruſt thee, to 
morrow [ will viſit the Lady again, I will venture farth in my 
Furr'd Chair, well air'd with Spirits of Wine, but let no Poet 
be there Neighbour ;: What haſt thou brought me ? 

Hood. A Woodflreet Cake candy'd for. your: Warlhip. 

Furrs, Away, away with it Hood, give it the-Girle, I can- 
not indure the fight of it, it puts me.in mind of Winter, *tjs 
the very emblem of a white Froſt Jawes lead me tomy Cham- 
ber James, farewell Miſtris Hood 3 farewell, home, home, aad 
take care of the Child. | 
LExeunt. 


Enter Sir Anthony Altalk. 


Sir A»th. Daughter, and ſole Heir, pretty.and young ! But 
this old Beldam has ſuch an eye over her, ſhe mult be fre'd, a 
Bond of forty pognds, payable upon my day of. marriage, ot + 
| _— trifle, and ſhe-is my own, 1 will about it imme- 
lately, | 


Enter Haod and « Maid. 


-. Hood, Here'take my;hood, lay it up Maid carefully : where 
is Miſtris Damerzs ? bins 
Maid. In the next Room by her ſelf, practiſing a French 
_ Dagxce. ITT . 
Hood. Call her, call her. 
. Maid, Miſtris Dameris. 


(42) | 

Enter Dameris. 

Dem, Well, what ſay you? 

Hood. Come hither, come hither, Miſtris Damerzs. 

Dam. What is your pleaſure, Madam? [| Makes a Conrt'ſ5. 
Hood. I marry, the world is well amended with you alrea- 
dy, company and converſation is all in all. 

Dam, Well, Countrey breeding is a ſtrange thing. | 

Hood. Did not I tel] you ſo? alas, what an admirable thing 
it is for a Lady to know how to make Cheeſe and Butter, to 
whip Cream, or make a diſh of- wild Curds, to be ſkilfull.in 
the great ſecret of Preferving, making Marmalads, Quidenies 
and Gellies. 

Dam. In compariſon of knowing the Town, to be able to 
_ cenſure Plays, to know how to behave our ſelves at Court, 
and Maſks, and in all publick places, to'be able to play at Om- 
bre and Loheir. 

'Hood.. To dance a Jig neaty, and fing your delicate little 
French Songs, and the Love-Songs in faſhion 3 Oh ! this will 
melt ar il] Nature, and convert him wholly into Love in a 
trice 3 theſe things get Huſbands without portrons-: But where 
did I leave laſt ? FOE in | 

Dam. You were inſtructing me how to inveigle a Lover. 

Hood; | marry there's the point 5 if you find him coming be 
not;too haſty, hold off and you may do what you pleaſe with 
him 3; let: him-have' no Favor to wear in his hat, no knot to 

tye at. the bottomehole of his doubler,' without a tedious ſute 
' forir: Ifhegive you a ſock ofhis hair, the pledge of his Love, 
be fure you. wear it alwayes when you know he will come, 
elſe you.may put on others, according to the ſeveral ſigns, and: 
ſeaſons of your Lovers, for-it is Jawful to hold ſeveral in play,. 
but be ſure. you pick our the richeſt of them for a Huſband: 

" Day.. | ſhafl'/be-careffll to obſerve that wholeſome Inſtru- 
Qion- | . 

Hood. And: if he ſhou'd chanee to catch you-with another 
mans hair, you mult proteſt it is. a womans'; that- you envter- 
chang'd the Favor, and that you call Siſters, and love one an- 
other dearly : then if he write to you, anſwer him oracu- 


tpuſly, be will be apt enough to flatter himſelf, I warrant _ 
and. 


(43) 
and take it in the kindeſt ſenſe : if you chance to fall out, let 
him ſeek to you firſt to be friends, but if he be crafty, and hold 
off, contrive it to be brought about by a third perſon, and be 
ſure you appear not in it, for holding off is a great thing in 
the Art of Love, many.a Woman is loſt, by not being able to 
endure aſſaults; a Lady of my acquaintance held out ſeven 
cars. 

a Dam. Oh ! Dear. 

Hood. But I muſt confeſs, ſhe had refreſhings in the mean 
time. When you are in publick places talk to another, and 
now and then give your Lover a look by ſtealth, and when 
you are together, let all your diſcourſe ſubt'ly tend to mar- 
riage. 

| [oi [ ſhall endeayour it. 

Hood. You will be invited to Suppers, Plays, Dancing mect- 
ings, and ſeveral other Entertainments, and are not theſe bet» 
ter than your Countrey Devices, throwing the whites'of white 
Herrings on the mantles of chimnies, to know whether your 
Husband ſhall be ſtreight or crooked, as they ſtick, drawing * 
out Huſbands in the aſhes, and twenty ſuch little follies? and 
then when you ſtudy, inſtead of good Plays, and new Ro- 
mances, you read your Books of Riddles, Scogging's Jeſt, or 
the Tales of the wiſe men of Gotham, and are kiſt by the Ste- 

ward, or the Butler, for want of a better, 


Enter a Servant. 
Serv. Madam, there is a Gentleman without defiresto Tpeak 
with you, oneSir Arth. Altalk. | | 
Hood. Have him into the Great Parlor, I come immediate- 
[Exit Servant. 
[ believe, by what I obſerved the other day, he has a mind 
to be your Servant Miſtris Dameris, you will have occalion 
ſuddenly to put my Precepts into practicez Go, go up, you 
mult not appear yet, I will come by and by and inſtru you 
where to put on a patch or two, | 


ly 


{ Exennt. 


G 2 ACT 


(4) 
ACT V. 


SCENE The Firſt. 
Enter Sir Anthony Altalk and Miſtris Hood. 


Hood. [| Proteſt Sir Anthoxy, I did not think it had been paſ- 
. ſible to have perſwaded me to it, but you have the 
ſtrangeſt way with you; Well, you will becareful of my Ho- 
nour, and not betray me, when I have done my beſt to ſerve 
on ? | 
f Sir Anth. No, upon my Honour, Miſtris Hood. 
Hood. Well, then get the Gold we have agreed on, and a 
Parſon in a readineſs. 
Sir Anth. You are to beat my Lady Pleaſants. 
+ Hood. True; I will prepare the Lady, and make her as wil- 
ting as I can to undo her ſelf; Farewel), let us about it quick- 
ly. | 
"867 Anth.. T will, I will, farewel. [ Exit $ir Anthony. 
Hood. Miſtris| Dawmeris, Miltris Damerzs. 
| Enter Dameris. , 
Dem. Yes, Madim. 
Hood. 'Tis as I told you, the young man is enamour'd. 
Dam. Thea [ ſhall have occaſion to put your Precepts into 
practice. | | 
Hood, No, things go ſoluckily, you will have no need of 
any of thoſe female fleights, he is handſome, rich and young, 
and has wit enough to make a good Huſband. 
| Enter James, _ 
James. My Maſter ſtays below in his Chair, and deſires yon 
to make haſte, and to meet him at. the Ladics. | 
Hobd. We go, we go Jumes. . [Exit James. 
Come Miſtris D2meris, I will inſtru& you by the way, how 
it is meet you ſhou'd behave your ſelf in this weighty buſt- 
nels. : 
/ [_Exennt, 
Enler- 


ft m—_—_— EIN 


45) 


: - Enter Courtly a»d Emilia. 

Court. May I not hope you will not alwayes be ſo cruel], but 
that my Love in time may havea kind return? 

Emil, Yes, you may hope, but it 1s as Creditors may, hope 
for debts from men that are undone : If ever I am Miſtris of 
my heart again, I ſhall remember what I owe you. _ 

Court. Though this acknowledgement is more than I de- 
ſerve, preſs'd by my Love, as Beggars are by want , I till 
ſhall trouble you, there is but poor relief in gentle words: 

Emil. But ſtill in vain. ; 


- 


Beggars from them a Charity implore; 
Who have given all they had away before. 


Court. May I not know the happy man to whom: you have- 
given your heart? I wiſh— 
Emil. What do you wilh ? | 
Court. The gift as welcome to him as it wou'd have been 
to me. 
Enter Widow. 


Emil. See my Couſin how ſadly ſhe approaches us, her eyes- 
fixt on the ground, I'warrant you ſhe's thinking-on the Colo- 
nel ; ſhe ſees us not. 

IVid. A Lover may, I find, as have heard the Soldierdoes 
ſometimes, in heat of fight, receive a wound, and at the time 
not feel jt : Idid not think I lov'd the Colonel ſo well, I know 
not what to wiſh, I wou'd not have his madneſs'real, and yet 
I'de have him love me too—— Ha! my Couſin and her: Ser- 
vant. [ She ſees them, 

Emil. So thoughtful Couſin ! this is not uſual with you; you: 
are thinking on-your Soldier now, you are all 'War, there is 
no Peace within you. | 

IWid. I was contriving how I might make the counterfeit 
Mad-man diſcover himſelf, that we might all laugh at him, and 
make him mad in earneſt, | 


Court, If that be the ſubje& of your Study, you imploy 
: «Four, 


(46). 


your bo oaghes in vain Madamz we hoped at firſt he did but 
diſſemble that diſtemper, bur it is growa ſo ſtrong upon him, 
and has daily ſuch ſtrange operations, that to our* grief we 
find 'tis real, and he deſerves your pity ſure, ſince you have 
-been his ruine. 
Enter Tatle in haſte. 

Tat. Madam, Madam, Miftris Hood has prevail'd; the Mon- 

my crawling up ſtairs, with a whole Furriers Shop on his 


iid. I cannot mind ſuch follies now 3 Are you in earneſt, 
Sir? 
- Court. I never praftiſed to diſſemble for my ſelf; and cannot 
but ſpeak truth for others. 
iid. If this be true, I ſhall deſerve your pity too : 
For though to him I've cruel ſeer'd, you'l find 
'Tis to my ſelf I have been moi} aekind. 
[Exit Widow weeping. 
Conrt. It takes well. 
Emil. I ſtill believ'd ſhe lov'd him, though ſhe alwayes pro- 
teſted the contrary. 
Tat. What ſhall we do Madam with this Salamander ? 
Emil. Peace Wench, here he is. | 


Enter Furrs, James, Hood ad Dameris. 


Furrs. Your Servant Lady. 
Emil. Your Servant Sir. 

[4 ſhont of Boys without : Enter a Foot-boy. 
Footboy. Alas! Madam, Madam, 
Emilia. What's the matter Sirrah ? 

Enter Widow. 
Wid. Alas, what's the meaning of this noiſe? 
Boy. Madam, the Colonel is in a moſt frightful condition, 
walks the ſtreets 3 here, he comes, look, look, Madam. 


Enter Colonel his Face ſooty, they ſeem all ama d. 


Furrs. Hide me James, what ſhall | do James ? here is more 


treachery Jamey, | fear. 
. James. 


(47) 


James. Alas, Sir, 'tis the Devil, I think you are too big for 
me to hide 3 that's well, creep cloſe, creep cloſe Sir. 


[_Furrs falls down and lies in a Corner. 


Bold. Do you gaze upon me? I come to bring you News: 
from Lucifer. CS 


In my Loves deſpair I fell 

Down to that Furnace we call Hell : 

The firſt ſlrange thing that I did mark 

Was many fires, | and yet 'twas dark : 

Inſtead of coſily Arras there 

The walls poor ſooty hangings were 3 

Spirits went about each Room 

With pans of ſulphur for perſume : 

Sod tender Ladies in a pot 

For broths, and jellies they had got 5; 

The ſpits were loaded with poor y ml 

That Devils roafted for their dinners 

While ſome were frying damned ſouls, 

Others made raſhers on the coals 

The waiting Women they did flew, 

That robb'd their Ladies of their due : 

Gamons of Vr'rers down were taken, 

That hung i'th' chimney ſor their bacon : 

Here Lawyers bak'd in Ovens ſband, 

For conzening Clients of their- Land : 

Millions of fouls, beyond expreſſing, 

French Devils tortur'd in the > > 4 

To cool them there, they drunk Jojo 

Of Beer huge dranghts of molten lead 3 

Burnt Claret they do never lack, 

And all their Spaniſh is mul'd ſack + * 

In throngs where new come ſinners ſlood, 

A Reverend Lady leſt her hood : 

A Chamber- maid' cry d ont, alas, 

A Devil had broke her: Looking-glaſs 

A Merchant cry'd, burnt was bis Stuff, 

A.City Wife did ſinge hey Muff. AT 
A Purchaſer 


(45) . 
A Purchaſer did howling cry, _— : 

Alas, hit-Deedr.and Seals did ſry< 

' A Conrtier loſt his Perriwig, 
A He@For loſt bis looking bie : 

Of FWhoremaſlers, there was great ſtore 

rho pleaded,-they'd been burnt before: 
The Drunkards that were in the rout, 
At laſt did piſs the fires out : 

Hell being ſpoil'd I came away, 

And ſinners now make boly day. 

[He ſpies Furrs. 

Ha! what rugged Monſter's that: lies here ? | 

Furrs. James, James, (tand before and ſpeak good James. 

James. Thom of Lincoln Sir, the famous Bear. 

Bold. And what art thou ? 

James. The Bear-ward Sir. - 

Bold.. Stand off, I'le have that place my ſelf, Vle ſet up my 
Bills, that the Gameſters of Londen, Horſieydown, Southwark , 
and New-market may come in, and bait him here before the 
Ladies 3 but firſt, Boy, go fetch me a Bag-pipe, we will walk 
the ſtreets in triumph, and give the people notice of our ſport 5 
come forth -Thoxe of Lincoln, come forth, I ſay. 

Furrs. Alas, Sir, I am-no Bear. 

Bold. Ha! a voice, ſpeak again, ſay what thou art. 

Furrs, A poor nahappy. man, Sir. 

Bold. What is thy. bulineſs-here.2.. .  - 

Furrs. Alas Sir, [was unfortunately. brought hither by that 
_ oyl'd Woman. + $68 a gt it 

Aood. He comes a wooing. Sir, to my Lady Pleaſant, 

Bold. My Rival!\Death, 1le tear.thee-limb from limb. 

ar 4:don ths 4% kt 1-1 CBolde ſirips hire. 

Farrs. Oh !-Sir a Jammer, good:Gentlefolks letme not be wor- 
ried to death... ..,: y | 

Fid. Good Sir, what do you mean ? 

Bold. Let me aloney.[:will ſtrip him naked, and ſet 'himin a 
tab of water up ta'the. chin; to. quench\the'fame within his 
breaſt; no mag ſhall Jove thee bat wy-1elF, 1, +» 

Furrs. Alas, Sir, I detelt;her, I renquace her, Sir, me be- 

_—_ ore 


"= . &. *. folks... 


it 


049) 
fore her face, I will never.come. where ſhe is agaip. 

Bol4. Come along thou filthy, old, diſſembling Fornicator 3 
Boy, lead me to the Pump, I will rinſe him as they, do poor 
Wenches at the Inns of Court; are theſe gray hatrs. fo hot ta 


come a wooing ? | E 
Furrs. Help, help, Oh James help, help, I am ruin'd; Iam 


loſt for ever. [ Exit Bold. dragging out Furrs. _ 
wid. Alas, Sir, for pity ſake follow, and let him do no mil: 
chief. | [Exit Courtly. 


How came he in this ſad condition ? 

Tat. His Servant told me, the man that ſhou'd have watch'd 
with him in his Chamber unfortunately fell aſleep, and when 
he awaked miſs'd him, none could imagine where he was, the 
door being. kept lock'd 3 after they had ſearched every corner 
of the Chamber, they heard a voice cry out Hell, and Devils, 
directed by it, they found him ſome yards climb'd up the chim- 
ney, they pull'd him down, he broke looſe, and the door be- 
ing then open, he came running through the ſtreets in this 
frightfull condition, all the way calling upon you. 

IWid. Alas, poor Gentleman, let us go ſee what is become 
of him. | Ex. Wid. and Emilia, 


Enter Sir Anthony. 


Sir Anth. All's ready, if the Lady be but willing. 

Hood. Much adoe I have prevail'd, [ was not ſparing in your 
Commendations, Miſtris Damerzs. 

Sir 4th. Madam. | 

Hood. No' complements, now time is precious Sir Azthory, 
where is the-Parſon? | 

Sir Anth. He ſtays below. # 

Hood. Miltris Tatle, will you be pleaſed to let us have the 
freedom of your room to diſpatch a little buſineſs. 

Tat. You may command it, the door is open. 

Hood. Thank you ſweet Miſtris Tatlez take the Lady by 
the hand, and follow me Sir Anthony. 

[ Exennt Mood, Sir Anthony and Das 


EO Wh ' meris. A noiſe without. 
Enter 


(59) 
Enter Furrs runuzug without his hat or coat, all we. 


Tat. Alas, Sir, how come you in this condition ? \ 
Farrs. For Charity, dear Miſtris Tate, conceal me from the 
fury of this mad-man. 
Tat. I know not where to put you, Sir. 
\ Farrs. Any where, any where, good Miſtris Tatle. 
Tas. I know no place ſecure, but my own Chamber, and 
that wou'd bring a ſcandal] upon me, ſhou'd it be known I hid 
you there. 
| [4 noiſe without. 
Furrs. Oh! good Miltris Tatle, quick, quick, he is at the 
door, he is at the door. 
Tat. Well, upon condition you will engage to marry me af- 
| terwards, I will venture my Reputation to ſerve you. 
ay L will engage any thing, good Miltris. Tatle, any 
tang. | | 
7. Well, then follow me. 
Fur. Quick, quick. [ Exennt. 


Enter the Widow at one door, Courtly at another. 


Wid. What have you done Sir, where is the Colonel? . 
Court. Madam, much ado I have perſwaded him into the 
next Chamber, and got him to permit a Barber, to reſtore 
him to his former complexion 3 but he raves ſtrangely, and 
calls upon you. | 

Wid. Alaspoor Gentleman, Ithought he did but counter- 
feit till now 3 what means has been uſed, is there no way to 
reſtore him to himſelf again ? 

Court. Madam, come along with, me, and ſee him, your pre- 
ſence, and fome kind words, may have a ſtrange operation, 
if it does not cure, at leaſt it will -allay the diſtemper at pre- 
ſent. | | | 

rid. You flatter me too much, I dare not hope what you 
affirm. : [ Exennt. 


The 


(81) 
The Colonel in a Chair #pon the Stage, and a Servant or 190 | 
Bold. Sing the Song Boy you ſung laſt night to make me 

_ SONG. 


- My Tomb ſhall be of Black deſpair, 

Filld with ſad ſighs inſtead of air 3 

Hung all with marks of cruelty, _ 

Pit only for me there to lye; | 

There, while I grieve, the Mandrake s groan 
Shall eccho back ; my diſmal moan 3 

Under alone old reverend Oak 

Whoſe bark's worn off, and arms all broke, | 
In Church: yard of mortality, | 
In melancholy ſhades T le lye 

Where nothing grows, for there's no birth, 

No life from bare inſipid earth, 


Enter Courtly, Widow and Emilia. 


..No Epitaph, no, T le have none, 
But loſt in time, as never known, 
Ne're mention d, but by all forgot, 
That all may ſay, they knew me not : 
Nor will I riſe, leſt I ſhou'd be 
A witneſ; how thou murderd'$t me. 


old. rifing out of the Chair takes the Widow by the hand. 


Bold. Unto a Feaſt I will invite thee, © 
Where various diſhes ſhall delight thee 3 | 
The ſleeming wapours drawn np. hot . 
From Earth, that's Natures porridge-pot 
Shall be our broth 3 we'l drink my dear 
The thinner air for our ſmall beer 3 
And if thou lik'ﬆ# it not, Te call aloud, 
And make our Butler broach a cloud: 5 
H 2 of 


(52) 
Of paler Planets, for thy ſake, 

White-pots, and trembling Cuſtards make ; 
The twinkling ftlavs ſhall to our wiſh 

Make a Grand Salad ina diſh; 

'$now for our ſugar fhall not fail, 

" Fine candid ice,” comfits of hail 3 

For Oranges gilt clouds wel ſqueeze, 

The milkie way we'l turn to cheeſe 3 
Sun-beams we'l catch, ſhall land in place 
of hotter Ginger, Nutmegs, Mace 3. 
Sun-ſetting Clouds for Roſes ſweet, 

And Violet skies firow'd for. our feet 
The” $phears ſhall for our Muſick play, 

ty hile Spirits dance the time away 3 
When. we drink healths Jove ſhall be proud 
Th'old Cannoneer to fire a Cloud, 

That all the Gods may. know our mirth,, 
And trembling Mortals too on earth ; 
And when our Feaſting ſhall be done 

T'le lead thee up hill to the Sun, 

' And place thee there that thy eyes may 
Add greater luſtre to the day. 


Wid. Heaven ! what extravagance is this? 
Bold. Boy, ſing the Song I gave youlaſt; you ſhall hear the 
Triumphs I intend you Lady... 


 $ONG. 


IWe'l plac'd in Lowes Triumphant Chariot high 
Be drawn with milk: white Turtles through the tkie, 
And have for Foot- men Cupids running by : 


A Poet Coachman, with Celeſtial fire, 
His gentle whip of melting pure deſire 
Shall drive ##, while 1 do thy eyes admire. 


TIwperial. 


(53) 


Imperial Laurel deck our Temples round 
As Vidors, or as heated Poets crown'd, 
Scorning to have commerce with the dull ground. 


Thas we will drive ore mighty bills of ſnow, 
Viewing poor mortal Lovers here below, 
Wretches al as, that know not where we go. 


Bold, How like you the delign, 1s it not rare ? 

Court. Admirable! 

Bold. Why does the Lady weep? 

[The Widow weeps. 

Emil. To ſee you in this ſad condition, Sir. 

Bold. May I believe her tears? they are not true. 

Wid. As true as ever penitent ſhed for his (ins. 

Bold. You love me not fo well to grieve for me. | 

WWid. I wiſh I had not g'in you caule to think I did not, and 
then I had not made my ſelf unhappy. 

Bold. Why , have not you a pretty Receit Lady to cure 
theſe little extravagancies, and reconcile me to my wits again ? 
What think you of a dark room, often letting blood in the 
forehead, under the tongue ? "oF 

Court. 'Fontanels Lady ? 

Emil. Purging by Hellebore, (leep provok'd by Ladanune. 

Bold. Cou'd you think Madam I was ſuch an Aſs to love 
you, nayRo ru@#mad for love of you! well, thou had'(t more 
cauſe than other Women to weep at the death of thy Hus- 
band : Widow, that face cou'd ne'er hope to get another. 

[| The Widow offers to go away, 
Moſt cruel_T yrant ſtay. 

Emil. And uſe him {curvily Coulin. 
| [ They laugh at her. 
IVid. Let me go unworthy man. 
Bold. Nay, I kgow thou lov'(lt me too well to leave me. 
Court. Who ever thought to ſee this hard heart mollified ? 
Bold, Faith now I think on't I mult leave thee Widow, I 


have an appointment at the Fleece 5 but if thou knew'ſt how 
. much 


(54) 


much it grieves me——Go, go into thy Chamber, comfort thy 
ſelf, lye down upon thy bed, and figh away a day or two; 
I will be ſo kind, when I am at leiſure, to come ſometimes 
and laugh at thee : Farewell, farewell, Widow. 
[ Exit Colonel. 
Emil. This is the manly temper you applaud Couſin, you 
love none but ſuch as have a witty faculty of railing againſt 
Love and honelt Women. 
| | [ Exit Widow. 
Court. How ſtrangely it has put her out of humour ! 
Emil. She will never forgive me when ſhe knows [ was pri- 
yy to the Plot. | . | 
Enter Hood. 


Hood. Oh dear Madam, I met the Colone), and he ſaluted 
me very civilly, and ſpeaks as if he were himſelf again. 

Emil, I, I, he is well enough Miſtris Hood, but my poor 
'Coulin is almoſt diſtrated now. | 

Hood. It is impoſſible ! a Lady of her gay temper ! I was 
coming to make her merry, by acquainting her with what 
has happen'dz yonder has been joyning of hands, Sir Anthony 
has hudled vp a match with Miſtris Damerzs, and Maſter Furrs 
has yoak'd himſelf to Miſtris Tatle, to oblige her to conceal 
_ him from the fury of the Colonel. 

Emil. Prithee go, and bring them hither, that we may wiſh 
them Joy, and ſee how fond they are of their bargains. 

Hood. IT will, Madam. aan 
| [ Faxit Hood. 
Court. Pardon me Madam, if T trouble yon once more with 
my unwelcome ſute, let me but know the man you love. 

Emil. You cannot be his enemy I'm ſure. 

Court. No, though he robs me of all my happineſs, I ſhon'd 
but make my ſelf more miſerableby offending him , for whcſe 
misfortunes you muſt grieve. 

Emil. I cannot ſpeak his name, but you were the occaſion 
that I ſaw him firſt. 

Court, The Colonel, my friend? 

Emil. It 1s | 


Conrt. 


(55) 


Court, The ſame, is it not ? 

Emil, His friend. 

Court. What means that bluſh ? 

-Emil. Do you not know him yet? 

Court. The Colonels friend, you faid, I think. 

Emil. The Colonels friend. 

Court. It is my ſelf, he long has honour'd me with the name; 
ſpeak, oh ſpeak, and confirm me now in this. 

El. | cannot tell you more, but I will never do a thing 
ſhall give you cauſe to think it otherwiſe. 


Court, Tor fo ſurprize me with my happineſs, 
My joy's too great, and ſudden to expreſs. 


Enter Hood, Furrs, with a ſurr'd Mantle over his 
ſhoulders, leading Tatle, $ir Anthony '* © 
leading Dameris, and James. 


Furrs, Are you ſure he is departed ? 

James. | ſaw him go, Sir. 

Furrse, I cannot brook the company of this mad Colonel ;- 
on my conſcience, had not the fright kept me ſomewhat 
warm, he had been the death of me; come my Dear, thow 
wilt be more comfortable to me in Bed than half a dozen blan-. 
kets; the warmth we receive from a young Woman is more na- 
tural and more operative. 

Emil. How now Tatle, what is the meaning of this ? 

Tat. Nothing, but whatis honourable, Madam. 

Furrs, Matrimony, Madam, I will {weat no more in For-- 
nication, nor will I hazard my ſelf any more a Wooing, 

Emil. I wiſh you joy, Sir. 

Furrs. Thank you, thank you Lady. 

Court. You have got a hopefull Wife, Sir. 


| Furrs. She knows how t6 make Caudles, Sack-pollets, and- 
Aleberries,can look well after my Linniog, and hogs we [weet- 
Sirz can'(t-thou nat my Dear ? 


Tatle- . 


(56) 

Tat. I will do my endeavour, Sir 5 but I fear I ſhall have a 
hard taſk of that. 

Furrs. Neighbour Hood, you have abus'd me now the ſe- 
cond time. 

Hood. Indeed, Sir——— 

Furrs. Nay, no excuſes, no excuſes, I forgive you woman, 
becauſe you have made ſo good a bargain for my Daughter ; 
I wiſh you much joy Sir, and you child, 

Sir Anth. Your Daughter Sir! why? you were never mar- 
ried till now. 

Furr, Tis true Sir, 'tis true, but I had ſome communicati- 
on with a Chamber-maid1 kept 

Sir Anth. Where is this old Bawd? 

Hood. You had beſt be civil, Sir. 

Sir Anth. Did not you tell me ſhe was Daughter and ſole 
Heir to a very rich Old Gentleman ? 

Hoods Sole Daughter, Sir, I ſaid. 

Sir 4th, *Death, am I cheated thus? I will be reveng'd on 
thee. 

Furrs. Peace, peace, Sir, your anger will but make it worſe, 
I will give her a brace of thouſands, and if you uſe her well, 
© a better penny. 

Sir 4=th, I muſt be pacified; 'Death, that hou” d be gull'd 
thus ! 

Emil. | wiſh you Joy, Sir Anthony. 

Court. -You have ſnapt up the Young Heireſs, Sir Antho- 
2. 

Sir Anth. Wou'd you had ſnapt her up Sirz a Pox on an 
Helreſs. 


Enter the Colonel. 


Furrs. The Colonel, the Colonel again, 

Hood. Fear not Sir, his mad fit is over. 

Tatle. And you can aſſure him you are not his Rival 
aow. 


Bold. Joy, joy be to you all-3 here has been merry doings 
I am 


— 


$7 
I am inform'd ; where is the Widow ? Sullen, and run into a 
corner ? | ER | | 
Emil. I will go, and endeavour to perſwade her hi- 
- ther. 
Bold. You will do her a kind office Lady, for faith I am in 
a very pretty loving humour at preſent. 
| | [Exit Emil, 


Maſter Farrs, I am glad to ſee you ſuch a happy man, make 
much of your Wife, and forgive me what has happen'd, and 
you will. do well. 

Ferre. With all my heart, good Sir, with all my heart, I 
forgive you : So, [ begin to be my (elf again, I did not like 
the (ight of him at firſt, a 

James. Sir 

Furrs. What ſay (t thou James ? | '. ; 

James. 1 dointreat your Warkhip to, ſpeak a good ward for 
me; there has been formerly treaties of marriage between Mi- 
{tris Hco4 and my ſelf, you know,..but they have been yn- 
luckily broke off Sir. = ti 

Furrs. Hood, come hither Hood, here.James, thou ſhalt have 
her in lawful ſolace. | 

Hood. Upon condition your Worſhip will put my life into 
the Copy-hold, .. F | | "o E 

Furrs. It (hall be done, it (ſhall be done Hood. 

James. Here's my hand Wn it. 

Hood. Well, *tis a bargaia then. 


\ 


Exter Emilia and Widow. 
- Bold. Oh: Widow, art thou come? 
id. Not to ſee you Sir, but to bid this good Cumpany 
Joy. > DA EE jos 
Bold. Wilt thou not leave diſſembling yet? come to the, 
point quickly 3 Have not you a: moſt vehemant; elire to 
have me to be your Bedfellow to night ? ſpeak, and ſpeak 
truth.. . 
rid. | know not what good Conditions may perſwade me 
I | tO3 


(58) 


to 3 but we ſhall ſcarce agree ourfelyes 3 if you pleaſe to re- 
fer our differences, my Chaplain ſhall be the Arbitra- 
tor. | 

Bold. Widow , I know thou lov'ſt me, and I wou'd do 
any thing in reaſon, but this Marriage is fuch a melancho- 
ly buſineſs.: Do you fee what a chearful look Sir Anthony 
has there? any thing on this fide that Precipice thou ſhalt 
comtnand' me : Faith, be not nice, nor fooliſh, many a 
__ hearty meal has been made without ſaying any 

race. 
wid. Much may be done upon a good ſharp ſtomach 
Bold. And haſt not thou been long kept hungry 2 Well, give 
me thy hand, within this hour I will have lawful authority to 
towſe thee, Widow. 

IWid. Tt will become me then to be obedient Sir : Couſin 
Emilia, do you continue that little idle humour yet, of keep- 
ing that a ſecret, which your eyes andaGions every hour dif- 
cover Maſter ? Courtly —— 

Emil. You need not give your ſelf the troubje Couſtn i 
diſcover it, the ſecret is reveal'd already. 

Court. Weſtand ready to follow you whereſoever the Co- 
lonel dares lead, and to make as bold a promile to each other 
as you ſhall, 7 


Enter a Servant. 


| | [Meſich plays without. 
Coxrt. What is the meaning of this ? 
Serv. The Muſick have had notice of a Wedding, and are 
without, Sir. 
Bold. Well, let the Chaplain be got ready 1n the mean time : 
becauſe we ſtand {6 conveniently hand in hand'; we will have 


a Dance, bid the Mufick play." ©, 


[ They Dance. 


After 


(59) 


After the Dance, enter the Setwant, and 
whiſpers Courtly. I 


hy. 


Conrt. So, the Chaplain is ready, let us goin; we that have 
not yet enter'd into Bond , will Seal and Deliver, and then 
ye will all fall to telling of the money. 

4!l the Men. Agreed, agreed! 

old. A very good motion, 

[ili the Men. A very good motion, 


[ Exennt. 


4% 
» 


fs 
a iy 


< 


MR.) 
i FT . . wx 

"RE 7" TON 
G + x $i hes s 
OTIS : 
YEAR «opt, 


Licenſed, 


Novemb. 27. 1576: 


Roger L Eftrange- 


« ad 

TR. VVidow, 

OR THE 
' MEDLEY of HUMOURS. 


COMEDY. 


Ated by HIS ww 
ROYAL HIGHNESs | y 


SERVANT 5s. 


Written by | 
His Grace the Du «tz of Newcaſtle. 


__ — 


LONDON, 


Printed by 7. M. for H. Herringoqn, at the Sign of 1 
- the Blew Anchor in the} Lower{Walk of che. | ; 


New - E = ' ”, 


Lady Haughty, 
Iſabella, els 
Nan, 

Mall, 

Cicely, 
Margaret, 
Codſhead, * 
Crambo, 


Juſtice Spoil wit, 3 
Sir John Yate 


A. 
DoRor, *+** of 
John, 73 
James, 
Gervas, 
Fidlers. 


Footpad three more, 
Conſtable, Officers. 


Rabble of Men and Women. 


Dramartis Perſonwx. 


% 
The Triumphant Widow. 
Her Kinſwoman 
Lady Haunghty's Woman. 
The Chamber-maid. 
The Dairy-maid. 
Another Chamber-maid. 
A Coxcomb. 

His Friend an Heroick Poet 
1 A fooliſh old Juſtice wu 
affeFed with clinching. 
An arch Wag, a Coxcomb fu 

Tf Monkey-tricks. 


The Cook. 
The Butler. | 
The Grange-tau. 


Rogues. 


py awwbs ti. wc 


(1) 
THE 


Triumphant VVidow 


OR THE 
MEDLEY of HUMORS 


ACT FL SCENET 


Poet 
F/1/0 


b fo 


- Enter Footpad with four more Rogues. 


ATURE never contrived fo fit a place 
for the Retreat of Rogues as this, where 
we have found a Cave the Sun never 
ſaw, where we have our Lodging and 
Tyring- room; for your compleat Rogue 

muſt ſhift as often as your Player: I hate a Fool that. will ſet 

up upon ſingle ſtealing, any Block-head may do't. 

| Rogue. Well ſaid, Noble Captain Footpad, you are a 
brave Rogue Commander both of Courage and Condudt. 

2 Rogne. And truly -we have-rob'd as comfortably under 

you, as ever we did under any man. . 

3 Rogue. We were once lixteen of a Company , but this 
vile ſtaple Commodity: of Hemp has ſaatch'd away a dozen. 
of the Number. | 

4 Rogne. But, Captain, this place is better than you think, 
for hard by here lives a wealthy Widow, young and band(om, 
ſhe keeps a noble Houſe, and has many Suitors, and a vaſt 

Reſort of Gentry coming, daily to ker Houle, there: will be 
prey enough for us: | -;; 

8 Footpad. I know 't, gpbd Sir, "WE not chuſe this place for 

nothing; well the Trade of Rogues; a noble Trade, and: 

thrives with many Profeſſions; ſometimes Rogue appears like. 

a Gentleman, then Rogue you like a great Man ;. bat'is in- 

deed 


Footpad. 


(2) 


deed very like a Lawyer z ſometimes he is like a Scholar, but 
indeed they are moſt like Fools. 

4 Rogne. Oh!but Rogue is very like a Politician Captain, 

2 Rogue. And like a Courtier too ifaith. 

3 Rogue. But is indeed the ſame with a Citizen. 

Footpad. Indeed it fits all Trades, and Country-men ; the 
Souldier's poor without it ; the Gameſter cannot live with- 
out it. | | 

I Rogue. Seamen may ſcape it ; for I have heard they are 
very conſcientious. 

2 Rogue. O yes, eſpecially Pirates. 

Footpad. Oh! but Rogue fits an Attorney admirably , it 
ſticks to him like his green Wax, the Attorney is married to't 
till death them depart : in ſhort, Mankind is one great, very 

-great Rogue. 

s 1:44; Ab, brave Captain. 
2 Rogue, Well ſaid, noble Captain. 
 Footpad. But Roguing will not laſt long in one ſhape, I 
muſt ſhift like a Cameleon upon every occaſion; for my 
Charter of Rogue allows methe freedom of uſing of al Trades 
and Callings. 

3 Rogue. Truly, Captain, you can appear in any Profeſli- 
on, 'tisa great mercy you wete well. bred; for none but a man 
of good Breeding could have made ſo good a Rogue. 

Footpad. IT am beholden to my Parents for that, truly they 
did breed me very wel], reſt their Souls, they were both ſlain 
at Tybwrs, | heard 'em there at Good people take warning, but 
I had more Grace than to take it , but for my firſt transfor- 
mation, I mean to turn Pedler, for I have left a Pedler faſt 
aſleep under a Hedge, I have (tollen his Pack, and bound him, 
and now I am ſet up. | 

1 Rogue. How will you diſpoſe of us? 

* Footpad. Be gone to your retreat, when craft'is to be uſed 
Ile do't my ſelf, when violence you ſhall afliſt me. 

4 Rogue. Buv, good Captain, let us comfort and confirm 
our ſelves with the Catch you made upon. our Vocation of 
Thieving, before we go... 

- Footpad.. Come on, 


They 


It 


(3) 
Since _ Profeſſuon's become a lewd Cheat, | 
And the little, like fiſh, are devour'd by the great 3 
Since all Mankind uſe to rob one another ; 

Since the Son robs the Father, the Brother the Brother; 


Since all ſorts of men ſuch Villains will be, 
When all the World plays the Rogue, why ſhould not we? 


Al. Ah brave Captain. 
Ah noble Captain. 
Ah brave Captain. 


Enter Gervas and Cicely, with another Maid. 


Footpad. Let's away, I'le to my Pack, here come Cufto- 
mers, that young Wench will be overjoy'd at the fight of a 
Pedler. | | 
' [ Ex. Footpad with Rogues. 

Gervas. Sweet Cicely, how long have you intoſticated me? 
I never was good Market-man fince I had honeſtly a mind to 
your body, that's the truth on't. | | | 

Cicely. How canT help.that? I never did avy thing to you 
in my life, not I. gs | 

Gervas. You look fo ſweetly upon me , you make my 
mouth water extremely, therefore if you like me ſo, if not, 
tell me 3 for wouf@d E might ne're ſtir, I'te not be ſo mudled 
again for all your Dairy, with all the produ@t of Cream, Cu- 
ſtard, and Sullibubs, nor T. be 

Cicely, Truly, Gervas, I cannot love. 

Geruas. Love, why thou art a luſty Wench, and that will 
provoke thee, Love is nothing bur being luſty, the reſt is 
twittle twattle: they ſay Love is a Boy, by the Maſs [ think 
Love is a Girl by that : it may be'you young Wenches think 
Love is a Boy, you love Boys too well ta the diſgrace of 
Beards. Ah confider, you know not what a man is,T would 
fain have you know me, there is pith, there is'pith in a man, 
and that thou ſhalt find to thy coft, if thou'tt but marry me, 
by the Maſs. dab Cicely, 


(4) 
Cicely. Why, Gervgs, I muſt think of it. 
Gervas. Nay if you think af it, or I either, we ſhall never 

dot; let us marry firſt, and think of it afterwards , as moſt 

do: why, Cicely, I will give you. a white Fuſtian Waſtcoat, 
and a brave Stamel Petticoat, regarded with black Velvet, 
Cicely. Guarded ſure you mean, Gervas. 4 
Gervas. Guarded, piſh that's but one Guard, and regarded 
istwo, at the leaſt, you have no Language or Expreſſion. You 
are no Scholar, Cicely, one is the Singular Number, and'two 
is the Plural, Oh a Grammarian is a fine thing, T will give you 
three, that's the Plural Number indeed. 
Cicely. | thank you, Gervas 3 but what muſt I give you 
again ? | 
—_— A little thing. that ſhall. coſt thee nothing, C3cel,, 

Oh for a bleſſed Pedler, if it be thy will ; for there are more 

Wenches won, with their Trinkets.,, than with any we have 

ay" us; maſs. wiſh. and have. Look where, he is, peace. 


"1: Enter Footpad like a Pedler. 


Footpad ſings. 
Come, Maids, what is it that you lack #. 
I have many. a fine knack, 
For you in my Pedler's Pack, 
Tour $weet: hearts. then kindly ſmack, 
If they freely will preſent you, 
And with Trinkets will content you. 


Gicely, Oh rare, how rarely he fiogs ! 
| [Three or four Maids and Men-come running, 
crying, Oh here's the Pedler, the Pedler. 


 Footpad fings. 
Bruſhes, Combes of Tortoiſe ſhell 
For your money I will ſell, 
 Cambrick, Lawn Wig as milk, 
Taffata as [oft as: ilk, 
by Gs as Soft: -.: :.. Foiage” 
Rings with moral divine Poſies, © SI: Maid. 


ri 


« CPI 
1 Maid. Oh what brave things he has got! 
2 2000 Peace, peace, let him troll it away, he ſings cu- 
riouſly. | 
4 Footpad ſings. 
Rainbow-Ribbands of each colonr, 
No walking Shop yet e're was fuller, 
Varions Points and ſeu'rd. Laces 
For your Boddies ſtraight embraces, 
Silver Bodkins for your hair, 
Bobs, which Maidens love to wear. 


1 Mar. Oh this is a rare Fellow, I warrant he's pure 
Company. | 
2 Man, I warrant you he'is very- ingenious, peace.. 


Footpad (ings. 
Here, are various Pick-tooth Caſes, © 
And the fineſt Flanders Laces, 
Cabinets for your fine Doxies, 
Stoppers and Tobacco Boxes, 
Cryſtal Cupids Looking glaſſes 
Will enamour all your Laſſer. 


Cicely. Sure, Gervas; this is the Kings Pedler , he has ſuch: 
Ire things about him, and he ſings like a Nightingal, 
Gervas. I believe he's the Kings Pedler indeed. 


Footpad (ings. 
Fine gilt Pray'r: Books, Catechiſms, 
: that is Orthodox, or 8chiſms, 
or for loyal Faith defendant 
Presbyter, or Independent ; 
Ballads freſh, all ſinging new, 
And all thoſe Ballets too are-true.. 


Gervar. That's -rare, come let's-ſ6e 'em.. 
1, Man. Let me fee.. LE”, 
2. Man. Stand away, let me come.. 


(6) 
Gervas. You come ! ſtand away, you Puppy, you have no 
judgment. 
Cicely. Oh pray let Gervas ſee, he has a notable vein this 
Way. » 
a Maid. Ay, pray let Gerwas ſee. | 
Geruas. Oh Ballets, fine-Ballets, Oh I lave a Ballet but e'ne 
too well, Heaven forgive me, for being fo given to the love 
of Poetry, What are the Contents of this, for I ſcorn to read, 
Footpad. Marry, Sir, a moſt lamentable buſineſs, 
Gervas. Oh it's no matter, ſo it be a fine Ditty. 
Cicely. Oh [ love a melancholy Ditty, I can weep at a Bal- 
let fo ſweetly —— 
Footpad. Why it is of a Virgin of thirteen or fourteen that 
dy'd a Maid, that's the truth on't. 
Gervas, Nay I'le be hang'd then, thirteen or fourteen, and 
die a Maid? it cannot be now a days. 
I Mar, What a ſcandalous World this is, to abuſe a poor 
G rl ſo. | 
Gervas. Ay, and after her death too. 
Cicely. Methinks they ſhould have more conſcience, than 
to ſpeak 111 of the dead. 
Gervas. Firſt and formoſt, I hope ſhe had more Grace than 
to die fo, I (peak like a Chriſtian. 
2 Marx. It (he did die fo, mercy of her ſay I, that's charitay 
ble I'm ſure. 
 Gervas. It (he did die fo, let it be a warning to you Maids, 
to ſhun ſuch abominable ways. 
Cicely. 1 hope it will, Gervas, be a warning, an' we had but 
Grace. 
1 2/4id. Yes we (hould lay it to heart, and take war 
ning. 
2 Man. Look here, what fine Ballet's this? 
Footpad. This is a very ſtrange Ballet, of a luſty Widow. 
Gervas. A luſty Widow 1s-no (trange ohing, 
 Footpad. Yes a luſty Widow, that lives and dies chaſtly. 
Gervas. Is't poſiible a luſty Widow live and die chaſt ? 
2 Max. Lord, Lord, what lying things theſe Ballets ar 
and to be in print too | | 


#3064 q 
Footpaoyy a 


(7) 
 Footped, All the Pariſh Hands are to the Certificate to 
bis confirm it. , : 
2 Man. Puh, 'twas plain malice in 'em, to aſperſe a luſty 
Widow ſo. | 

, Gervas. The Pariſh ſhould have had a luſty young Vicar, 
ne} and he'd have converted her i'faith. Maids have a care z for 
you hope to be Widows, have a care I ſay of dying chaſt. 

Cicely. Well, we'l think on't ; but pray let's fee his Ware. 

Gervas, How now, Cicely, you area Wag, have patience, 
and he will (hew you all. Oh vile Fleſh and Blood! Oh cor- 
rupt Nature, to deſpiſe the edification of Ballets : but what's 
this ? | by 

Footpad. A Ballet of a Courtier that died rich. 

Gervas. That's a miracle indeed, I warrant he cozen'd ma- 
ny a poor body fort. 

Footpad. No, Sir, he ſcorn'd to meddle with the poor. 

Gervas. That ſhew'd he had ſome conſcience ; but Oh Cz- 
cely, here's the brave Ballet you and I ule to ſing, I know it 
by the Picture. 


_ Cicely. Oh pray let's ſing it. 

Has They fing. 

al Gervas. To Fayrs and Markets IT did go, 
Cicely. And I did follow you, you know. 

54; Gervas. As T return'd, I threw you down 


Cicely. Upon the Graff, 

a Gervas. My ſweeteſt Laſs; 

And ſo did give you a green Gown. 
Cicely. But if it chance my Befly ſwell, 


wi Gervas. Then will Marriage hide it well. 
Cicely. Your Son and Heir, or Daughter fair, 
If you'l not ſtay, += 
W. 
Gervas. But run away, 
7 Is left unto the Pariſh care. 


Enter a Servant in haſte. 
Serv. Oh, Sirs, my Lady wants ye, there are a-great ſort of 
ſtrangers that are to come to diae here, and: none of ye ithe 
'K way to receive Orders, come away. | 1 Mat. 


(8) 
1 Man. Come, honeſt Pedler, up with your Pack, and fol- 
low us, we'l make you welcome i'faith. jo 
.Gerpas. We'l buy all his Trinkets to the laſt Jet Ring, or 
_ of Incle, we'l hamper him i'faith, we'l leave him no- 
. thing. | 
Footeal. Bleſs you, bleſs you till I complain. 
1 Mar. Nay; Gervas, you ſhall go with us, and theſe Maids 
too come along. 
.Cicely. Ay, good Gervas, | .t's follow the Pedler, _ 
| [ Exennt omnes, 


SCENE II. The Garaen. 
Lady Haughty, Iſabella her Kizſwomar, Nan her 


Waiting Gentlewoman. 


Lady. Well, Nan, have you given order to all the Ser-fj 
vants to be ready, and to mind their bulineſs ? | 

Nan. T have, Madam. | 

Lady. And whom (hall I be troubled with to day , what 
Suitors, what Gueſts ? 

Naz. Sir John Noddy, Madam, has feat word he'l wait onff| 2 
you. - Oh he's the fineſt merry Gentleman. | P 
Lady. Oh do you name him firſt? my Woman is my Rival, 
Couſin, there,ſhe is a well-wilher to that Knight ; therefore weſſ v 
muſt ſpeak well of that Coxcomb before her : but who el(e] ft 
dines here? m 

Nan. Juſtice Spoilwit, thea Colonel Boxnce. h 
Lady. Worthy men indeed, we have a Coxcomb that lies 
in the houſe too, Mr. Cod/head, | thiak he will not be anſwe- 
= witch his Eriend and Governor Mr. Crambo, a Heroick 
oct. | 
Tjab. Your Ladiſhips Houſe I think is the Exchange for 
Suitors, the Dining-room 1s always full of Lovers of you, and 
the Hall always full of eating Parſons, and other Lovers of 
luſty Dinners; but, Madam, every body wonders, that your 
Ladiſhip keeps open Houſe to all Suitors, and yet denies 'em 
every one their Suit of Love. Lady, 
w 


[AUM) 


Jl- 


Or 
1Q- 


ids 


420 


t [tes 
(we- 
oick 


e for 
, and 
rs of 
yout 
s 'em 


Lady, 


| AUN) 


(9) 
Lady. I have. anſwer'd: moſt of the men of ſenſe, but the 
turbulent Fools will-ſtj{l. peſter me: how I deſpiſe the lictle 
follies of Mankind, the little ſubtilties they thiak to intrap a 
Woman with,too.cheap to cozen Babies with ! I will triumph 
over all the overweening Fools, and ſtill preſerve the freedom 
of a Widow. 

Tſab. Your Ladiſhip is in the tight 3 for Marriage now en- 
{laves the Wife, but ſets the Huſband free. 

Nas. But methinks folitary Widowhood is but an uncom- 
fortable condition: can no man be fit for your choice ? 

Lady. None. | 

Nan. What ſays your Ladiſhip to a Souldier ? 

Lady. Oh he's too boiſterous, I ſhall have no converſation 
from him, I ſhall hear of nothing but Naſeby, Edgehil/ the 
firſt, and ſecond Newbery, Marſton- Moor, and the reſt, nothing 
but of roaring Cannon, Batte], Murther , and ſudden death ; 
all bis Diſcourſe diſordered and confuſed like a routed Army, 
one had as good converſe with a Drum : beſides they are de- 
bauch'd in drink, which is a great enemy to the civility that's 
due to a Wife, 

| Nan. What ſays your Ladiſhip to a Lawyer then ? 

T/ab. A Lawyer! there's a Huſband, what with his Terms, 
and his Circuits, a Wife may go hang her (elf. for his com- 
pany. | 

, Lady. Right, Coulin, there's no enduring on't , unleſs it 
were lawful to make a Letter of Attorny to a Gallant ; what 
ſhould one do, there are' ſo many Geofails , a Lawyer only 
_— his Eatry to hold his Claim, that's all, Ile none of 

im. : (IVE 

. Nan. What ſays your Ladiſhip to a Biſhop ? 

I/ab. A Biſhop! why-he cannot confer Honour upon his 
Wife:z ſhould I marry a Biſhop, it would be your Lordſhip 
to him, and to me how do you, Miſtreſs ;.no, I would draw 
19 at equal yoke, 'when I do draw. 


Lady. Beſides he'l not be govern'd, he'd not let a Woman 
be Head of the Church ; this makes 'a Wife ſhow like a Con- 
cubine,, which ſhows Marriage is unlawful-to the Prieſthood; 
then he entertains his 'Wite, as if he were teaching a Boy . 

TIT | C | - Greek, 


(19) 
Greek, as if we had'no eapacities:but accidental;!' 1 154 
- [7ſab: You bad beſt marry'lim, Nan; and let'ſome Gentle- 
many have good luck to Horſe-fleth by-you.”'! | BEL 
* Nax. But, Madan, a rich Citizen 1s a brave thing. 

Lady. I hate to fee a Huſband walk the length of his Shop 
asa Fox, or a Civet-Cat does the length of his Chain, back- 
ward'and forward, backward and-forward: - Bod? 

T/ab. And then his Houfe is ſo dark, as'if he were mad, 
aad put there to recover his Wits. 

Lady. And a Garden ſcarce big enough to lye at length, 
and be buried in. | 

Tſab. *Tis a fine ſight to fee him ſtrutteh yards before one 
on a'Sunday to Church. | | 

Lady. And if he be Sheriff or Lord Mayor , 'tis a comely 
ſight to ſce him on a grey Gelding, with goJden Trappings, | 
ſit in Judgment over penny Loaves and pounds of Butter. 

"Tab. -Or to fee him (Jeep over Malefattors at'the 014-Ba#ly.'. | 1 

Lady. Out on 'em, from their Cuſtards, Fox-furrs, gold' || | 

Chains, ſcal'd Rings, gold fring'd Gloves, little Cuffs, Cha- 


molet Cloaks, and little plain Bands, Heaven deliver me. 
Nan. You are very hard to pleaſe, bat a Country 'Gentle- 
man 15—— | 


Lady, Not to be endured , his head's full of nothing but 
Dogs and Hawks, and the Houle peſter'd with here a Mar- || ! 
row-bone, there the excrement of a Dog, there the muting C 
of a Hawk. 7 Felt | | | 

Tab. Out or em, Country Gentlemen take-more delight 
i0-Beaſts than in Women, ENTeT 09 S042 EA 

Lady. And he's no company, yet talks as confidently, as if* 
he talked well, and as loud always, as if he were at a Horſe-- 
Race, a Bowling green; or a Cock-pit:'I'hke him-not, 

Nan; Well; I'm ſure a young Heir hewly+ of Age, whoſe: 
Fathey died' young! wilk-fit you,” 7 © OH 

Lady. No, no, they are all P6ols; caudled vp by their Mo- 
thers. ' | A | 

Nav. Why there's it, Madam; are 'not ſome Wives twenty, 
nay ſome-thirty years before they-catt make their Huſbands ' 
Fools, and you-ſhall have hith ſd ee firſt day; 'is' not that'to'P,'. 
your adyantage ?. | Tfahs- 


»— 
— 


ER Ox=Xz2s mn 


|[AUN) 


| OY C11) 
16b,' Welkfaid, Naw chat was home, ©: * 
Lady. Oh but, Ng, ;your Squire Fool is a ſtubbbta Ani- 
mal, your dandlcd Fool made-my_youtig Maſter, 'by the flat- 
tery of old Serving-men and Country Neighbours, a wile 
» man 1s more eaſily; govera'd. - ._ -- - bi 
4 - Naz.. Ay, Madam, but, ] do not mean ſuch a young Heir, 
I mean one that's a Scholar, and has been at the Univetfity. 
I/ab. Nay, Nan, there you are out, ſuch a Fool will be (6 
peremptory , becauſe he can conſter and perſe a little Greek 
or Latine, to think himſfelf.a wiſe man. , | 


Lady. That's true; Coulin, ſuch Fools as vajue themſelves 


n upon Languages, never conſider Language is but a Trunk to 
convey our meanings by z for ought I know Welch is as good 
7 as Hebrew ; a Diftionary is no wiſe book, nor a walking Di- 
1 Gionary a wiſe man.. | | | | 
I/ab. Suppoſe he has. three words, Hebrew, Greek, and La- 
.* | tine for that, Tree, he underſtands no more of it, than [do by : 
3' | the word, Tree, nor. the. uſe of it more. | | 
b Lady. Right, Couſin, only his head is peſter'd with three 


words more than I have, which'is to his diſadvantage ; for 
- | men whoſe heads are, full, of words, are always empty of 


ſenſe. | 
t Nan. Madam, your Ladiſhip is ſo haſty; I'de have himaf- 
. | ter he has bcen at the Univerſity, to be bred well at the Inns 
of Court. 


Lady. Now you have hit it, one muſt needs be a dull Fel- 
t' | low, who.cats nothing but dry Loins of Mutton, and pores all 
| day upon huge Volumes. of Reports, and Year-books, and 
F* | Preſidents, or trots to Weſtminſter , and fills his Note-books 
»-. | with the, Opinions of old Geatlemen in Coitis, and when they 
. have got Law, they think they have got the very guts of 
e | knowledge z but their Worſhips are miſtaken, Wiſdom and 
| Knowledge cannot be loſt: but where was their. Law in he 
| Rebellion? The Conqueror always makes'Law, and alters 
| Divinity as he pleaſes. | hs 
| 7/2b. And upon.ſuch. an alteration, where would: be tte 
s |: wiſdom or uſefulneſs of Lawyers and Parſons ? \ 
'F,'--Nar. Your Ladiſhip is very nice, I rather than have ro 
C 2 Huſband, 


” = 
- » 


GS dee ike 2 added odd Eee 4 
#- 4 -, 220 _— : 
6 ' / 
( "+ 8 ) « 
3 R 


Huſband, would have all the ill qualities of all theſe put into 
one man, and take him for a Huſkind, "and without fo much 
as a ſhirt too, or hopes of ever getting ohe. ''' 

Lady. Indeed, Naw, you are in a very deſperate condition. 


| Enter Codſhead and Crambo. 
 Tjab. Yohder's Codfhead and Crambo, good Madan, let's in 
and dreſs our (clyes. _ phe 
Lady. Ler's avoid 'em. 
Come on. | | | 
[Ex. Lady, Iſabella, 2»d'Nan. 
Cramb. Lord, what ail you, 'Mr. Codſhead, this morning ? 
I'never ſaw you.in ſuch a dump before. ' 
Codſp. Faith I am as dull as a Dog, the Devil take me, and 
as lazy as a Dog i'faith. 
Gramb. Why what's the matter, man? 

, Codſh. Why I was drunk as a Dog laſt night with the'But- 
Jer i' faith, and I am (ſleepy as a ps Toe morning , and cola 
as a Dog 'faith; but the Devil take me, F made the Butler 
ſpew like a Dog, and wheal had'done, I c'en left him, for he 

ank like a Dog, and I warrant him he is as fick as a Dog; 
but for all that I am as hungry as a Dog, faith, for my ſto- 

-mach-never fails me.. | | 

Cramb. Will you. never leave off your Similes of a Dog? 
I have told you of this, why the Widow is a witty Woman, 
and wil laugh.at you extremely, and ſhe'l never marry one 
ſhe laughs at. 

.. . Codſh.. Faith they lye ſo readily at one's tongue's end, I 
cannot avoid them, I hate to pump for a' Simile:; but the 
"dear Dog ſerves one upon all occaſions , as lean as'a Dog, as 

- Ul-natur'd as a Dog, as dry as.a Dog, as hot as a Dog, as cho- 
lerick as aDog,as lame as a Dog,as deaf as a Dog, and a mat-- 
. ter of a hundxed' and fifty more; but fince you fay- the Wi- 
" dow will laygh,/I will bite my toogue, but Vie avoid. 
© © Cremb. Pratiſe before-hand, and ſee if you can talk with- 

-» OUT Mo. Fe |» 

... Codſ6. Faith' T muſt have ſome other Phraſe then, now 

atdan't 1 know. what co fay , Tam as heayy and as oe ta 

Kage) .T: "IE | Ina -EIEV11, 


_ = PA | 


_ Codſh, Belicye me.'tis.pretty_methiaks... 


TYE”! "(3 PIO _ 
Devil ,, what, a Devil: ſhall I ay to this Widow 2 Gad take 
me,.ſhe is as coy as a Devil, that is, (he ſeems to be, bue ſhe'l 
diſlemble like the Devil ; Pox on't I am as fick as a Devil, 
I am in no-humour to make Love, and this ſcurvy Widow: is 
as proud as the Devil, the Devil take her. 

Cramb. Lord, what a ſtir is here with the Devil'! this is 
as bad as a Dog, © 2 0 | 

Codfh. No, the Devil's fitter for a Gentleman than a Dog, 
I hope; but I may uſe ſuch Similes as theſe,as brown as a Ber- 
ry, red as a Roſe, black as Jet, ſoft as Silk, round as a Ball, 
ſweet as Honey, drunk as an Owl , as ſtrong as: a Horſe, as 
dull as an Ox, &c. Faith theſe are fine ſmare things iq; difſ- 
courſe, and fill up finely.  4T r-- 60 

Cramb. Out on 'em common and dull, fit for Fellows of 
no ſenſe, the Widow will never endure them, I can aſſure 
you, if you mean to get her, -leave 'em. Ons 

Cod, Pox on her for me, I don't know what I'ſhall do 
with her, I maſt have ſomething to fill up- the chinks of my 
diſcourſe. If you forbid me theſe excellent Similes, I muſt 
ſwear and curſe bloodily, the Devil take me. . 

Cramb. And be damn'd will you? | 

Codſh, '$o one be damn'd like a Gentleman , with a good 
grace, eſpecially when 'tis the faſhion to be damn'd too, I 
think he's a ſtrange.ridiculous Fellow , that will take exce- 
ptions at it (for my part_)-:I'm ſure no-Man of Honour will, 
they know better what belongs to a Gentleman than fo. 

Cramb, There's not. ſo fooliſh and inpertineat a fin. as 
Swearing , not natural, no pleaſure, though the reſt of the 
deadly-ſins are pleaſant, very pleaſant. ' 

Codſh. I never ſaw ſuch a man in my-life, may not one 
ſwear by Heavens ? | 

Cramb, Why, _that.was aq Oath in Kings James his time, 


and exploded long ſince, 


Codſh." T have heard it was uſed in thoſe days, when holy 
Axchorites called roaring Boys, dwelt in Milford-lane z, but - 
what ſay you to by my truly ? 

Cramb. 'Tis a childiſh Oath. 


Cramb. | 


| 014). 

" *Cramb, Believe me! why there'sanother, who will believe 
one/ another ? ' now 'are not theſe fooliſh and unneceſlary 
words ? | ” 1s bebo: I | wy 

Codfſh. What ſay you to Faith and Troth? for T muſt have 
ſome word or other. | 4 
'1 Cremb. Fanh and Troth! why there's no Faith nor Troth 
amongſt- men now a days. | Watt > 

Codſh. Oh Lord,'T bave found out the fineſt, prettieſt, in- 
nocent word , I'm ſure will pleaſe you, Adaid, ah adaid, no 

adad,'that's fine, very fine Adad. 
hp #2 + Thar's a filly word fit only for Fanaticks to cheat 
 Codſp. What ſhall I do > What (hall 1 do? T have found 
it-now I'm ſure, as T am an honeſt man, as I am an honeſt 
-man, ſo itbe ſpoke loud and heartily, with your kand at your 
breaſt, and repeated often. 
- © Cremb. Men may uſe that Phraſe, and never be forfworn 
in this Age, but Ile not allow you that, nor by this: light, 
they're Milliners Oaths, and Haberdaſhers of fmalt Wares to 
:cozen with. - | | 
 Codſh. Mercy upon me, what will become of me? bur I 
will uſe one word in deſpight of the Devil , as ſhe is deadly 
handſome, deadly pretty, her complexion'is deadly lovely. 

Cramb. If you doule it , you will loſe a friend of me, and 
I'm ſure my Lady will laugh at you immoderately, 'tis ridicu- 
lous, deadly lively. «44 

Codſh. Will you give me leave then to curſe ? as a Plague 
on you, Fack, a-Pox take Foun for an arch Rogue, 'or ſo? 

Cramb. By no means, men are apt enough 'to the Pox, 
without your curſing, if you mean the great Pox... 

Codſh. Great Pox! what ſhould I mean, the ſmall Pox? take 
you; that's not worth the curſing; but to a. proud Lady's 
face 'tis a fooli(b ſaiveling curſe, I would as ſoon ſay the mea- 
ſels take you, hea iu. il 

- © - Cramb. But none of theſe will I allow you, they'r fooliſh 
afteQations riot to be endur'd. ' NW 
Codſh. You are very, rigid, what will become of tie? nei- 
ther as hungry as a'Dog , nor as-proud'as a Devil, = Ws 
| run 


(15) 
drunk as an Owl, nor no full-mouth'd Oaths, nor midling 
Oaths, nor your pretty little, Hecle Qaths, nor Curles neither; 
why a faſhionable Gentteman ſhould not{peak at all by theſe 
Laws; if theſe were ſtrictly obſerved, our Gallants would be 
dumb, for they cannot:fpeak without them. Would yaw have 
a Gentleman to make ſigns, or ſay nothing but ab, ah, all like 
a Turkiſh Mute ? 

Cramb. Better than to-talk affectedly or ang 5 why 
ſhould men be fo fooliſh to uſe unneceſlary words ? 

Codfh. Oh lamentable! unneceſſary do you call 'em? Swear- 
ing is very neceſſary in many caſes, asin aa Army for agOffi- 
cer 3. if he ſays, Truly I will break your head, or, —_ I will 
hang you, the Souldier will got believe tt; but if he lifts up 
gs Cane, and cry Zounds, le pay you , hel crouch and. 
ODEY. 

Cramb. This is a ſenſleſs errour , no man is thought hoge- 
ſter, valianter, ar: truer of. his word for ſwearing ,; they ſwear 
on purpoſe to cozen , theſe fooliſh by-words are. norman ; 
cuſtom, try and break your ſelf on ny or” you will certainly be: 
laught at, and loſe this Widow. 


_ Codfh. "Well for your ſake will try, but I (hall ne're do't,. 

x leaſt I ſhall have no joy in diſcogrſe,, « will ds lo dull and 
cavy. | W's 9. 

Cramb. You-are miſtaken, try in private. 

 »Codfp. I will; but''tis very hard, Fle to my Chanberadd. 

practiſe, , 

Cramb. Do ſo, and let's meet. at digner.. 


Fr 


ACT 


| C88) | 
XC IT 


Enter Juſtice Spoilwit, « and a Servant ? of the Houſe. 


| 4 bo my Lady at home? 
Serv. She is, Sir, but ſhe's in her Chamber drefliag. 
Juſt. Prethee Friend call the Butler , that I may have a 
"* of Sack before Dinner. 
vere. will, an pleaſe your Worſhip. | 
| | {| Ex. Servant. 
| | ' Enter Colonel Bounce. 
"Faſt. Whom have we here ? Coll. Bounce ? Gad ſave you. 
Coll, How do'ſt thou honeſt Juſtice Spoilwit £ 
"Feſt. Thank ye Coll. but what wind brings you hither > 
- Colf. Why faith rhere is here a rich, and they lay, a merry 
humor'd Widow ; and if ſhe thinks fit, Fle venture thy 


y with her in lawful Wedlock. 
Top But I will evi the Banes, good Colonel Bounce. 
Aſide. 
q | Buter Sir John Noddy. E jd 


obn. Fa, lo la, la, Oh honeſt Tuſkice, how is it : J 
EZ Sir John Noddy'! i in good fairh I am heartily glad: to 
ſee you, -now we are compleat , we ſhall be as merry as the | 
Maids Coll. this is a Friend of mine, pray know hin. 
Sir John. Noble Coll. F' kiſs your hands. 
1.” Your Servant, Sir : emi tx Juſtice what Butterfly is 
this ? 
#ſt. Oh he is a very witty merry Knight, he's of the Nod- 
dy « of the North, an arch Wag indeed, 4% 
[The Fu ; agg leans upon his Cane, Sir John 
Noddy ſtrikes it away, and the Fuſtice 
\ Fs ood 'y to fall upon his Noſe. 
Sir John. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, brave Juſtice, ha, ha. 
Faſt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, well go thy ways, thou art an arch 
one, you would make one die with laughing, ha, ha, ha. 
Col. mocking them. Ha, ha, ha, ha, i'faith, Sir, you _ 
make 


(17) * | 


make one die with laughing , Pox on him * is this a merry, 
witty Knight, with tis Monkey tricks > © *' 67 
_ Sir John. Faith I Iove to be merry, my Lord , my Neigh- - 
bour is ſo pleas'd with me, he'l gever be without me. 
Jaſs. Indeed, Colonel, he's excellent company, he would 
make one burſt with laughing. ' 7 | 
Sir Jobs. I remember yeſterday at my Lotds, ha,ha, ha,ha. 
Juſt. What Sir Fohn ! ha, ha, ha. 
S7r John. I laid a hot ſtone in the Window , and his Man 
Tom came, and ha, ha, ha, did ſo horribly; ha, ha. | 
[The Juſtice all the while” laughs with him. 
* Col. What burn him ? S | 
Sir John. Ay, ay, and he threw it away, and ran for Sal- 
let-oil, ha, ha, ha, it had like to have kil'd my Lord, 
Juſt. Ha, ha, ha, very good, nay you are the beſt at theſe 
things in the world, i'faith he is Colonel. ''r 
Col. As God fave me; but if he ſhould uſe me ſo, T would 
beat him exceedingly. "OHFT 
Sir John. Another time one of my Lords Men ſtood very 
ſoberly, I held my finger thus, and called him Fack of a 
ſudden, and. he turn'd ſuddenly, and hit his Noſe'ſfuct a 
bump, ha, ha, ha, Ihad almoſt died with laughing, 'and all 
that were by laugh'd ſo it was wonderful :. my Lord hearing 
it ask't what was the matter, which they told him, then ſays 
he, I thought it could be no body but my Neighbour Fack 
Noda) 5 for there is not ſuch a' witty Fellow-.:in the whole 
Country again. 79 Strat 
. Faſt. No more there is not i'faith, —"_—_ k. 
' Col.” The Devil take me, if I fee any ſuch thing, he is for 
ought I ſee a moſt groſs; abſurd Coxcomb. & 
Sir John. But ſays my Lord, theſe are gifts\that Nature 
' beſtows 6n tne; on forme more, o'ſome lels, as The pikaſes : 
his Lordſhip ks in che right, they are gifts, thar's.the truth 
on't, but ha, ha, ha.” remember agother was ſtanding by the 
fire, I heated the great end of my Rididg-rod; and pub it in 
his hand, he flew ſuch a way, ha, ha, ha, Row the fire, oh, oh, 
oh, oh ; Men, Women, and Children laugh o horribly, ſfwear- 
D 


. Ing 


4 


mM $ ex} 2x ©; | (18), 
ing that'Sir Joby Noddy was the beſt company fe the Eapth, 


. and che wittiett Gentleman. 

J*/*. Look you there, Colonel, he is a very merry, brisk, 
faceriout perſon.indeed. 

| Col. He is a very witty perſon indeed; | 

' $3164. -Atas} Sir; no not; I; not;b by-no, means, Sir, yet 
I ſwear my Lord will ſeldom bei 'withant me, eſpecially at 
Chriſtmas, if T be but away a fortnight a at any time, he ſends 

poſte for me, he:cannot be without: me. 

a+, -Dges no body ever. take JOU: on the ous for theſe 
things ? 

' - S8inJohn. 'No,no, ſometimes they' ay Leave your "=" 
or Fle knock you, I vow I'de teach you better mangers, were 
it not for my Lord,or ſo; then 1 laugh and proteſt I meant 'em 
no-harm, and drink drunk with;em, and all's well again. 

. my Ay, ay, why. who.can. take; ſuch pretty, innocent mirth 

? 

Sir John, And then Tentertain-them.well at my houſe, and 

my Siſter makes much of them, they loye me the: beſt of any 

Gentleman inthe Shire of any Quality. 

Col. I find you have a-very good Siſter,, x that will. make 
much of Ps 

Sir John. I, Sir, ſhe's as good a Siſter as any man has, I 
; thank God. * 

-.01.GoL Juſtice, one word: with yOu, does he come. to make 
Rove to the Widow ? goD 

4 [ believe he does. | 

d-1.1 [.8ir John gives the Juſtice a jerk in 
1:13:12 the: Ham, and laughs. 
Gre Ha, bo, oh,hb,thum. , 

-; -Hazha;] hayehagh,” um, get, ou.gone, you Wag. 

1 [1Sin Jobu.r/ This! is Tyigk 1 ,bave made my Lord laugh 

| with, till he has been: Apo to fall down. 

_ bong ought 1 hear he,is.the, merricſt Lord. in Europe., 
60,10 . 2N? 71 mn 61 eg! 47211 8606,Þr &t 
-aayel old i1104 01 11fn1; BOSE 'the- Butler... DS TTT. 
Toft Oh how now, James, art thou come?- | 

Bnutler, 


member 1 s\ again like a ph (hall be undone, V; 
ho - ſhaltTofe $er 'Widow!: ha, ye I'ſwearing "AIP, Lwil bite 


Car9) 


Byther, Lam. glad to.ſce your Werlkip: yo Sir JobuT am 

your Worſhip” $ humble Servant?” gu0? vor 
[$i John beds rhi Butker's. Hat | 
out of his hand. "7 

Juſt. & But-) Ha, ha, yobr Worlhip will never leave 

ler laugh. Theſe things, ha, ha:- | | 

Jt. Ha, ha, ha, well you are the very'(t arch one; but. 
dear Sir Joby forbear , you will kill me with laughing, b ſhall 
break a vein i'faith. 

Butler. Come, Gentlemen, will you pleaſe to take a caſt ,of 
my Office, and take a Cup of luſty Canary. of Margh- peer 
that will make a Cat ſpeak. - Diogd tHo'--=8 2 

Sir John. Well ſaid, James ; but where's my Lady? - "_ 

Butler. Not dreſt yet: come, ' Gentlemen , be: pleaſed t@ 
walk in the while, her Ladiſhip's a drefling.: - 

Juſt. Come, Gentlemen , I am for a Cup of Sack, before 
Dwnner clearly. pe 

[Sir John 24kes the Juſtices Cage, and 
ſets it before James, who falls down. 

KY Ha, ha, oh, oh, forbear, -good Sir.Johr, or [ mult 
leave you, ug am not able to endure it, ha, ha, ob, oh, 'um, 

k "Sir Joh th Pairh ] [ cannot help/it , [love to be merry ha, 
a, ha. * 

James. Nay I know your Worſhi will never leave, eill 
your mouth be cold, Hs the ſa ayng is, * ha, ha, 

(VA [Exennt ones th 


4 ml 


Enter Codſhead, walks muſing, | hy _ 


Codſh. Ha, you are all my Rivals, but therd's ne're 2 hand- 
ſome Fcllow amongſt them, the Devil takemez'j1 amicurfing 
again like a Devil; look there agaia, like a Devil, what 6 
I do to fpeak?' [ fee'the Juſtice:1s going withythe the Bu 
will be as drunk as an Owl=— drunk as an Owl, Boe 


'tis again! I will bite my tonguelike a Devil, bus/1 oe Te - 
hat wi 


become of me? I am in a deſperate condition; Ga me 


* 4 
S F 


*- 


1% : (20): 

my tongue enongh to remember it ; let me (ce your eyes, 
Madam; your bright eyes z ah it was a coming ; 'your bright 
eyes have ſo enſlaved me, that the De----- (ah it was juſt a 
coming there) that I can, no longer, as I ho--- there it was 
again ; that, Madam, I can no longer call my/heart, my, 6wn ; 
that was pretty well----- You are the pretty Thief that ſtole 
it, and go---- O Lord it was een out, this-is a «cruel' pain; 
but, Madam, think me not rude, if I apprehend your Ladi- 
ſhip for this Love-felony : /for if you do not reſtore m 

hearty, or--»-.give me ſome comfort, the---- oh I ſhall be as dull 
as a---- oh hold, hold, .it muſt be overcome with great 1a- 
bour and-induſtry. Well before I marry her, I will do what 
I cat toabſtain 3 but when I have her, I am reſolved to.take 
my full ſwing : ha,-there was a. whole ſentence without oaths 


or curles. - 


[ 


- Enter Crambo. ; 
"""Erambo. Oh'Mr. Codſhead, I am. glad to ſte you alone, you 
have been practiſing. | 

'Codfp.' I have 2 little I'm ſure, I (weat for't. | 

Crambo. Come pray let me hear how you have profited; 
**-'Codſ#. T (halt never do't.z. yet jultngw when I 'was a pra- 
aifing, methought EL did it pretty well I fee I-muſttake great 
pains for it; - 3 

Crambo. Try Ile belp-you; begin ſome difcourſe. 

Codf#, Juſt now I met Bluxderbus, my-Neighbour, coming. 
to the houſe. 

Crambo. Did'you?- / 

Codſd. I vow tis true.. 

Crambo. I vow | 1; 

Codfh: The'Devil take me ee. 
_ Crambo: What ſwear and curſe! *_ | 

Codf#., Oh'Ebeg your pardon with all my heart.. 

Crambo. What (aid he to-you ? ; | 
=, kr, Why. he ſaid he was as lean as a-Dog, and fallen 
away like aDevil. 1 1 7 | 
SING: "Erambe;” Dog and 'DeviFagain & (if 56 7 oy 4 Ye | | 
' * Codlſb.- He faitd'Þ would not/fay't-for a thouſand pound, he 

faid too I look'd as thin-as'd Shrimp. | 


Crambo. 


- "IE 


# 


W591 


Crambo. Thin as a Shrimp? 7 ae you forge 
Codffi. No, I tell you he ſaid,, What tio Grenc VOper- 


ſons ! rake me with ſucha trick, and hang 
_ Cre nfo ye! that's fine. | 
2x61" Lor never ſaw ſuch a man in my life, why that 
a aot-in my "Leff on; but togo on, [am ſure if 1 look 
lean, this reſtraint muſt cauſe i it, for want of due (wearing 
and curſi iag , and ſome graceful expreſli tons, I'm very much. 
heart-burat for want of 'em Ile [wear. 

Crambo, You ſwear. | 

Codſh., No, 1 faid I would 'ivear, bat | did not. 

Crambo, Why then you did lie. | © 

Codſþ. Why ſhall a Gentleman have no liberty, neither 
ſwear nor lie, nor any thing ? this is to give over being a Ca- 
valier, I had rather be a/Cobler,, he may ſwear and lie,, and 
do what he-will. . -, 
 Crembo, $0 this' was welt, you begin'to mend, wp \nce | 
again 3 what would you ſay, if you were with my Lady? 

Codſh. Thus, Madam, I never ſaw ſo pretty 2 white Devil. 

Crambo. Again at the Devil !- 

Codfſh. Ay, a white mi why "twas a black bis you for- 
bid ; theres br Devils'o volts, Sep Coalte -blackiblue, 
white, gray, what de lack, bug you put me-ous;'T will cell 
her ſhe's a prettyThiet, and has ſtoln my heare. , 

Crembo. Ay, that's well, 1 would- make uſeofharrhought 
myſelf, (hall [-horrowy it of you far my next work 29::107> / 

Ced(b... With all my heart, and Dat ) fad Theveliveaferve 
you 1 proteſt, | 

Crambo. Out on't proteſt ! 3-201; 

Codſh. Lord, what'ſhall 1do > © 417 0014s or 

Crambo. Not ſwear. . 195243 $0110 216 

Codfh...Faith and Ttoct { Ho ndh fivet:- 9s C2. 0! 

Cramba., Are Faith and, Troth-no © 39 

Codſpe Oh none at all to thoſe Rappers hive.! 

| Te nhl; muſt oor ſwear at all. © | 


}\ 


Cad EA NAD or ipeakt... | alaq Yoo eoil 

code F Bur pray go on.” gn JT 2id evioflibas 

4." - Codfb. I bave forgot, - you have put me out, [I muſt po a- 
gain and practiſe by my ſelf. Crambo. 


(22) a 

L ls IR $9, YaPTr Omg B2& 07D alu 

-::Codſh. WW Ell ad! SN AFP i@ 2d £07 1i9e, CANAL 
Z 


Crembo. How Gtenetick,; how dull am if when, T would 
compoſe, a Sonnet. ;t far Babel Afr n-cJoided 'with'fogs 
andifymes,.and ſuch a heme wauld jn{pire any man bur me, 
1ctear my days of ballating dtaw-near,1 AM impotent, Hitch: 
ed-in Poetry, awake my drowhie. Fancy , , Will | wy Mafe ſhow 
me a Jades trick at Jaſt ? rowſe up. 

Hum---- 7hou joy of my heart, 

- Thox' wonder of. Nature, Pe 

Thou, Hum ———- I can go no > further. 
It will not do, I fearl am loft, 1 thought to have won her 
bivagt: by Poetry. and now it fails me. 


2 Fyter Tfabella. 


-Tſab- Is' MERE > —+ methinks. he'is a very dull 
Fellow, I have heard ſome of theſe Heroick men ate very foo- 
Tiſb;, if. they be-all, like him., tbey are better Sub jets of a 
Play than qa *twould: ba reat, caſe to Comical Poets 
ho d be fugply,a wit : 

7 rep Here bers dan, Hf ere ? be- 
"Cork: 1 faw: you.: W 


: * 21 pf « x ? 
. Tſab. 1 waxgant y 
2110 Gnirabory No, ao rag put, on a freſh 


erdure- ;vy 1450 yin 19 40 r It 


- + 12H febai arp onhs Garfengs Hers 


Crambo. de. pre —- woul Dr Me 2'Spriog, 
fince you arriv'd the Flowers beeame more fraghat the bluſh- 
ing Tulips raiſed their drowfte PRA -$ mee af the if aght | 

os 1-17 bright oy; 


, adm oh 


Iſab. 1 did apt: Moth, the nd Fon to hats that you nes ak of 


Crambo, Pocts and, Lovers are Gn ted, Madam; Li- 
lies look. pale to ſee theur,. white ity ms, ace, 
and Roſes bluſh for Thame, Tring Ne freſh fon Eg atyou 


| \ ng | £300 $11 717 oved 
| | 899 rſeb. 


fee'that the Oho'be taken; care: ofs! /- oH 5H! 91 


(23) | 
- 7ſab! They are toomodeſt of all conſcience, I had t 
the Lilies and Roſes had had more diſcretion z but, Si Fam 
glad to find you ſo Poetieal; for my-Couſio my Lady\Hawghty 
TG oul# beg the favour-6f you to.make-ſome pretty; ruſtick.en- 
tertaihment in-Poetry:;/ ſhe: has Servants enough-to ſtudy, it, 
and Mulick+ we have within 'our felyes, /here will. be. ych 
Comp d it witEmuch mecreaſe our micth. - Eg.” 
cvacs, tie” honours me with-her. Commands ; "I you 
would joyn your's, it would inſpire me. 
tſab. If that will do you good, Ido: | 
Any way, ſo we have it done. {+1 i [| Afde. 
- i1Gyamb. The Hoaour iviſrbies, 'E:kifs, y our, fair /hands,, it 
(hall be done tt a moment: $7 '!. 15 | [ Exit Crambo, 
10% I  Emnter: Mall inibafte. 
Iſab, How now, M24, whither in-ſuch haſte? 
' "214/-"My Lady has fenr meta the:Cook, Madam, to bid 
him make haſte with Dinger. | Ns 
Iſab. "Tis Wl. 23 21-515 wy 
4750 HO - TT * (8x, Mall, Iſabella. 


Me 


SCE NE; the Kin ol with rb be Mfla Cook: with three 
or fayr. Cook v#nd three, ,an 9 Jan tnter-Sir: mts. 
4 & 

Ataſter Cook. hook to _ Boiler: there ». keep gre fires, 
/'-1 Cook. 2It ſhall be done; Maſter, s 
n Maſter. Be very careful and diligent ahere | io'the Scalding- 

ouſe.. "1 
2 Cook, They ſhall. 

Maſter. You for the Range, look you ſpend as much But- 
ter as you can for. \Fees, that we may not.want;another day. . 

1 Cook. Tle warrant you, let uyalone. for that. 

Maſter. Arm the Roaſt:meat with Paper; my Lady's Bills, 
Anſwers and Depoſitions ia Chancery, with all hes Ladiſhip's 


| Attorney's Letters,:theſetare. ordained for the Roaſt. 


2 Cook, It ſhall be done, Maſter :-then' for the. Paſtry Prins 


Works with Coriats'; Crudities , and. therloog, Preſbyterian 


Expoſitions 


C4) 
Expofitions upon the 1-4 ons < rs ad Se of 
both Houſes. - 7» £11k 
I Oodk: All theſe'we Hove alrvgily;. 

| [* Oh, if we had but- ſome Ga &L, $63 with the 
two Play-houſes, they would furniſh ys-rarely, they fay they 
have hundreds of Plays brought to. 'them 4n,a-year , that ace 
good for nothing elfe; +we might buy 'em at-two Shillings a 
Stone ;, theſe are thoſe they'retule, and they, might throw us 
ſeveral of thoſe they -AQanito the bargain, 


Enter Mall. | 
Mall. Maſter- Cook;imy. Lady has'ſcot me to;you, to, defire 
you of all loves, that you will take very: great care;,that the 
Meat may be well order'd ;-Jeſt ſhe. Gould be thought an ul 


Houle- - keeper; afid you diſgraced... AT. Arc 
Maſter. My Sweetheart 51 —_ give a 9H, and then [ 
. will anſwer my Lady. TICS: LLCADTITE 


Mal. $tand away, you are the ſtrangeſ.map. = 

Maſter. In aword, we want all things we ſhould have, but 
Fle do what I can, and a man can do no more; 5 but prethee 
fit bpon'my knee, my Dear, here fill ſome Plum-porridge for 
this Gentlewoman, bring, ſome of the Tarts apd Cuſtards too, 
and you ſhall pay nothitig, butnow and then a-Kils. 

Mall. Nay piſh, Mr. Cook,, my Lady will bean aogred. 

After. Onndsy Tlove thee Sweet, and baye. done ever 
fince 1 came to the Houſe) and ſo: thowHhalt find. Fames, 
prethee ſing the Song I made of Mrs. [Mary £9; the fogle Cit- 
"ern: come bring out the Tarts and. Culſtards.. - ' 
(be eats ſi ting _ his Lap. 


| Gideon | 
56" Jing Fj fy," this Love Fry fuch , a coil, 

$0! high does boil! 7. . 

Love's htat doer'niake bu efigas 4 fre 

Of bot deſire, 

That all my fancy'it does: trouble, - 

11:Dove' fo doth bubbles | =» | 
My Toving Pot'can buld no wore, Firs 
But does run ore. 6 fo Maſter. 


" I Cook, {ome on. 


| (25) 
' Maſter. How do'you like it, my Dear ? | 

2141. I doubt you mean naughtineſs, forſooth, or elſe it is 
very pretty. 


1 Cook. Thou fhould'ſt ;kim Love upon the top, 

Or with a Sop 
To ſoak it, or elſe to dip it, 

© Many a Sippet 
Would keep't within Love's circle, then 
Stir tt agen | 
And if it riſe, ' twill down, you know, 
If that you blow. 


Mall. This is ſcurrility, as my Lady's Chaplain ſays. 

Maſter. Nothing but fimilizing , as Poets muſt do 3 but 
here's a Cup of Wine, my Heart and Soul to thee, Ounds no 
man loves you better than I do. | 

Mall. But I cannot ſtay, forſooth, my Lady will miſs me. 

Maſter. But alittle, go on Famer. 


1 Cook, Then diſh it up unto your wiſh 


. In Love's ſweet Diſh : : 
When Love's ſweet morſels we have taſted, 
None ſhall be waſted ; 


What's left we'l ſet wp cold to eat 
For butter d meat. 

An ill Cook now is he that lingers 
To lick his fingers. 


Mall. Oh gemini , what Songs you make me here ! well I 
don't mind 'em, I don't underſtand 'em : come will you let 
me go, my'Lady will chide me grievouſly. | 

Maſter. Good Sweet- heart, ſtay but one Song more, and [I 
have done. , 

Mall. T'le ſtay no more Songs, notI: if you don't let me 
go, T purteſt ['le never come again. | 

Kiſſes her.] Look now, tiow Fiddles, you are the ſtrangeſt 
man. * 21? 4.on 

| E | Maſter. 


C26). 
Maſter. But one Copy of; Verſes, dear Sweet-heart.. 
Twill invite thee t0:Love's. back-houſe, 
There bolt our Love; for Love will make us 


' Not mealy-month'd, but in Love's Oven, 
The heat that's there mill-make us loving.” 


 AM-l]. Nay get you gone, lama young Maiden, ; and not fit. 
for iheic kinded things. 
Maſter. Ney good: Sweet-heart; if thou ſay J/ 20, 
Then out, alas ! my Cake is dow, . 
_ y_ these-that's extempory.,. Mrs. Mery L. bow do you 
like it 
Mall. Farewel, I will not ſtay, that's once. 


Kiſſes her.] Nay pilh, fy, get you gone. 


[Exit Mall. 
Maſter. Farewel my Heart and Soul with. theechere where's 
the Clerk of the Kutchen ? OE PT WIG, 
Enter Clerk... + .., Ry 


- Clerk, Here, what do you want,? 

Maſter. Want | quoth he, we. want every "thiog in the 
World, aFoxont. - -- 

Clerk. Be patient and you! fhall, have all. 

Maſter.: Patience! Pox.on.pajicace, 'Sounds my Lady is dif- 
honoured for ever, you will neyer be able to repair it. 

Clerk. Prethee what's the.matter man ?- 

Maſter. Blood, there wants a wooden Candleſtick in the 
Paſtry. Cook , quoth: hel the:Nevil would not be a Cook at- 
this-rate. 

\ Clerk, Is that the matter? that will be.a great diſhonour 
indeed, come there ſhall be one. 

Mafier. And then we have none but Ruſh-candles in the. 
Kitchin, when we. ſhould have Torches, it is ſo dark. 

-Clerk, Come be patient, and\you ſha want nothing, Mr. 
Cook, here.1s-a-Friend of mine, pray make him welcome, 

Maſter. You're welcome, Sir, cut oft a,piece of the Chine. 
of Beef preſently, ſome. Anchoves , and Weltphalia., here's a. 
Boule of Sack to-you., here; give-me the Can that meaſyres 
Alcby. the Yard, Derby meaſure, Sir, here's this Can of Sack.. 
ro-. 


(a7) 
-to you, Sir;l cannot ſtay, Sir, you ſce'T'muſt be' gone Sir./Come, 

. Where are ye, ye lazy [Rogues ? fall to:your work, _ the 
Oven there, and ſee how the Pyes colour. (+11 

Clerk, Maſter Cook, you do not know theigood alicies 
of this Gentleman. '- 

Maſter. Truly 1 do believe he is a very civil Perſon, pray 
eat heartily, Sir: well, Boys, how-are the'Pyes ? 

2 Cook, All very well, Maſter. 

Maſter. Look to the Boiler, it does not boil too faſt; but 
what were you ſaying, Sir ? Mich'y- good dit ye. - 

Clerk, This Gentleman plays rarely on the Muſick. 

Maſter. Faith, Sir, ſince T'have given you a caſt of my Of- 
fice, pray give me one of yours, and 1'faith here's the other 
Can of Sack to your»health: 

Mnaſic. With all my heart. 

Mafter. Come out you Myrmydons, and ſhake your heels, 

-1'faith Ile have a Dance, though my Lady has no Dinner. 
2 Cook, Come out, Boys. | 
3 Cook. Come out, Lads. | 
[ They all come out and dance, while ſome liſoad others 
are keeping time with their Chopping- knives. |] 
Clerk. Very well done, Boys, well danc'd; 
Maſter. Thank you, good Sir, here's r'other Can to you, 
Sir-: :come; my Boys; take up your Drum-ſticks, your Chop- 
ping knives, let the Dreſſer be your 'Drum , and upon the 
Butter-meats and Sallets beat a Call then, ſound your Trum- 
pet, your Yar&of Can for a Charge, and diſh up quickly. 

Mujic. Why you have Military: Terms for all thefe things. 

Maſter. Sir , 1 hdye beer General's Cook ,- after Dinner 
Tlegive a tull deſcription of all, but now I canfiot (tay, fare- 
wel, Sir. | 

Muſt c. Your Servant, Sir. 

[4 great wiſe ao ing uponthe Dreſſer. 

Maſter. Come you Rogues, td your Cans, and be 

nimble to't, Boys. q mritu Omnes. 
Enter Footpad aud vids Rogues. 

1 Rogue. This was a brave buſinsfs, and-well laid. 

2:Fogne. We unbound the Pedler,whb roared out for kelp 
and 1aquir'd after you. E 2 3 Rogue, 


- 


(28) 

3 Rogue. We pitied his condition mightily, 'and told him 
we had ſeen you, and directed him a wrong way, whither he 
1s gone in great haſte to purſue you. . 

Footpad. That was bravely done, with my Pedler's Pack I 
made 'em all cut their Purſes willingly, never Endian King 
\ parted with his Gold at eaſter rates for Hatchets and Knives, 
than my Coxcombs have parted with their Money for my 
Trinkets. it 

' 4 Rogue. What is the Purchaſe, Captain ? 

Footpad. Fourteen pounds and a Noble. 

Al. Ah, brave Captain. -_ 

Footpad. They pick't their own Pockets, but now I hope 
we ſhall pick '*em for 'em : they love Gypſies maialy, and me- 
thinks we look as like the Race of Ptolomy. 

I Rogne. As Hogs greaſe, and the Rind of Walnuts can 
make us. 

2 Rogue. There are Strangers there, brave Gentry, an we 
could light o'them. 

3 Rogue. Luck if it be thy will, that we thrive in our Pro- 
fellion, | | 

Footpad. Have at thee Fortune, they ſay thou art a Whore 
F will have a bout with, though. thou art grown ſo common, 
thou favoureſt every Blockhead. _ 

4 Rogue. Would ſome of the Strangers would come out to 
us, be ſure they're full of Money. 

Footpad. Come, let's roar out our Song of the Gypſies 
with laudable voices, and-that may train 'em.out of the houſe. 

I Rogwe, Come on, let's be merry by our ſelves. 

2 Rogue. Come----- Hove finging mightily. 


Footpad. So well, that as thou. liveſt ſioging, thou wilt.die- 


finging, a- Plalm-I mean. 


2 Rogue. 0h the brave jolly Eypſee, 
, Who often inifipfic, m 
And has ftrong Ale good fore. 
With a little black Whore. 
t#-hen credit does fail 
With fat: Hoſteſs for. Ale; 


(29) 


He grows dogged and. ſulltn, 
Steals her Geeſe and ber Pullen. 
. And Linen that's bleaching, 
If it be within reaching, 
'Tis juggled away 

By night or by day. 


Then Fortunes we 4h, Ss 
But ſtealing does well 
To help out the Trade, 
Which is ſomewhat decay d. 
tWhen Maids are a kiſſeng, 
Their things never miſſing, 
Then we take our tine, 
And think it no crime, 
And then the next morning, 
Their Hue and. Cry ſcarning, 

|  IWe care not a ſtraw _ 
o For their Statute Law. 


T Rogue. Here come ſore of. 'em: 


Enter Juſtice Spoilwit, Colozel Bounce, and Sjr Jolin 
| ., Noddy, .aud Butler. _. 


Juſt... We'l take a Turn here before Dinner, bring us word 
when her Ladiſhip comes: down. s 
_ Butl. ] will, Sir, I muſt go look after my: Miſtreſs Margery : 
here are ſo many Gentlemen's Men, I ſhall. have. one- or other 
ſaap her.up. | | 

Juſt. T'faith was-it you that made. this Muſick 2. you-are 
brave Gypſies, melodious Gypſies. | 

Sir fohx, Where are the reſt.of.your Company ?. 

Footpad. They are behind, an pleaſe. your Worſhip, but I 
am chief. | | of 

All Rogues, This is our- Captain; . | 

7uft, ,What, I warrant you can tell Fortunes, prethee look. 
in,my hand, and tell me mine. . | 6 of 
M4 os þ Ras 1) 0 8: cots Col; 


(30) 

Col. Prethee, Juſtice. why wite'thoir Ve ſuch an Aſs? doſt 
thou think they cantell >? | 

Juſt. Colonel, 1 do offure you! PI notable un- 
derſtanding men, men of excellent parts Gypſies. 

I Rogue, Sir, Fle warrant yab,Tle tell you yours. 

Col. I'm ſure T'le give you nothing. 

1 Rogue., Tis no mattex. 

2 Rogue. Sir, let me ſee'your' hand. 


[The Juſtice and Sir John nov 's em money. 


I m—_ — By your Venus Trench 
You ſhould "love a Wench. 

Col. Should? why-F a you Puppy, and fo does all the 
World. 

Footpad. I ſee plainly. that you will be Kaighted, and 
marry a rich Widow. 

1 [4s they tell their Fortynes, they pick their Pockets. 

Col. Ounds ye lying Roguts, to flatter him fo. | 

Juſt. Good Sir, have patttnce, Y' faith they are men of skill, 
Fknow 'em. 

Footpad. How Fools will lie, and help to Cozen them- 
— 


. So God ſave me, I have known fome ores es pre- 


aids as well as Zillyor Cadbury.” | 
2 Rogue------ Sir, it hs healbyoly miſhap 
Tn your time to get a Clap. 
4 ' | They all langh. 
Col. What dull Rogues theſe ire!'why yyouR Raſcals, is there 
a Genleman that has notthad/a' Clap ? 
Sir Joh. Faith and Troth'I ive had fix, lietfe and great, 
ha, ha, ha, 
aft. "Ha; ha, haz buti' faith ſhall I be LN ai ang mar- 
ry the Lady, hah? _ mo SY 
1 Rogye, Pray; Jir, let me ſee. EY rn ih ty 24 HY 
* By Jour hand. and this line © YO. 0D 
Ton love a Glaſs of Wine. 4-4 "oilint 
Col. Why you abominable dall Raſcal, does not every ho- 
dy love Wine and Women? there's n Secret fiidecd 3 Why 
thou ſtupid blockheaded POPEY , 1 could year thy: brains 


out, ; 


(3+) 
out; if thou: 'had' ſt any-: come, a Pox one; let's: beipone;- 
Juſt) Nap; Colonel, haye patience; alas! you douge ' 
underſtand theſe things, theſe are gifts. | 
Col. Gifts! Fmaſure, Vie-givethem nothing, 
3 Rogue. Alas, Sir, I am Ingram man , 1 deſire no money; | 


Tle pray for your Workhip. 


Col. Ay, think you may have-wit enough for that.” 

Footpad. By this Line of Honour, Sir, I find you'l be made - 
a Lord before-you: die. 

Col. Come away; you blockheaded Jaſtice. - | 

Juſt,” Well I come; a Lord-!: Ohibrave, a-Lord! well ſtay | 
here, and'Fle get my Lady to-ſond for ye; and pray let her 
know thar ſhe'is-to marry me. 

Col. Come away, poor witleſs-Cheats, poor'Fools. . 

Sir Fohn, Ha, ha, ha, look you there, Juſtice. 

[sir] John ſ#rzkes-aw4y* one'of the Gypſres Sticks- 
Fiſt, Ha, ha, ha; 1 —_ we Howh: have. ye V — hab, . 


| ha, ho, ho. 


Sir John. Ha, ha, ha, have [ canghe? you, Jaſtice?+ 
[8ir John walks with his hand upon the - 
| Fuſtice's ſhoulder, whips off his' Hab.-- 
Juſt Ha, ha; ha, you will never leaverfaich , you are'the.- 
plealanteſt man, ha, ha, ha. 
Col. Come, theſe are the (illieſt cheats: 
[ Ex. Col. Juſtice, $ir John... 
Footpad. Go your ways, youT find your: Fives Oy by - 
and by. ons 
*Tis true you are witty, butimy judgments rightir; | 
Since my Pocket's full, and your Pocket's lighter: 
Come my brave Rogues; let's be gone, this was a brave boo-- 
ty, let's away, and ſhift- andidivide, leſt if weſhould ſtay, we. 
may be taken and hang'd\ about this buſineſs. | 
All. Come away, noble Captain.  LEx. Rogues, : 


Enter Lady Haughty, Iſabella, Nan. 


Lady.. Where are-my doughty Lovers? I have tay 4a pair * 
of minutes for 'em at leaſt,. 


_ Ifab:: 


(32) 


I/ab. Some Ladies would be as-proud of ſuch a Train of 
Lovers, as Lawyers are of many Clients, or Divines of heaps 
of Pariſhes to follow them. 

Ledy. Some Lady would ſtrut and take upon her, like a 
new upſtart Favourite to a Prince, that flyes above the Gen- 
try of his Country, and uſes 'em ſcurvily. Indeed I have not 
much reaſon to triumph to day, for I have none but Cox- 
combs. 

T/ab. But you have every day variety, as a Favourite has. 

Lady. And I uſe 'em ſcurvilytoo, but yet they come and 
diſlemble, fawn, flatter, worſhip, and fall down before me, as 
if they took me for the golden Calf, and I all the while look 
upon them with the ſame ſcorn, that a new-raiſed Favourite 
does upon his Betters. 

Nan. Did your Ladiſhip find ſuch great affliction 1a Matri--, 
mony, that you are ſuch a violent enemy to it ? 

Lady. So much, as 1 am reſolved neyer to be ſoconſtrained 
again, I'le continue as free as Nature made me; why ſhould 
we ſubmit to that fooliſh Animal Man ? Let him be head ! Ile 
keep the Fools at a diſtance, and make them crouch. 

Naz. But I hear of one Courtier too, that is coming down, 
that,will win you, the fineſt nice, p:rfum'd, periwig'd, fea- 
ther'd Perſon in the World | 

Lady. I know who 'tis; what ſhall I marry an outſide of 
a man, a Fellow put together by a Milliner, Perfumer , Fea- 
ther-man, and French Taylor ? | 

Tſab. When Womea fall much in love with men for their 
fine Cloaths, I wonder they are not more in love with the 
Taylors that made 'em. | 

Lady. A rich Suit out of an old Wardrobe would make as 
g00d a Huſband, Ile give a Receipt of him : Take fine rich 
Cloaths, and do not pay for 'em, take a Barber for a Coun- 
ſellor, rail at all bur the preſent, ſcorn and endeavour to de- 
pre(s all Arts and Sciences, which he knows nothing of, whi- 
{per Proclamations in your ears for Secrets; tell you what t!1; 
King ſaid 'to him once upon a time ther ſhall be namelet: 
when he ſcarce takes notice of him once a year,” perhep: 


ſpeaks to him neer. 
N 202. 


TY WY HVUa=e 


nome; 


(33) SR” 

Na#. Oh; but they: are rare men tor making -Love, Ma- 
dam. 

Lady. Faith they have but one Receipt of making Love; 
which is like an Almanack for the Meridian of the/Court, 
and generally ſerves 'em for all £-g/and, Quack-ſalvers, Em- 
piricks in Love), that have but one Receipt for every thing. 
The commoa High- -way of Love, flatter you, and condema 
others, extol your Wit, and yet think to make you a Fool, 
praiſe your Vertue, and yet ſtrive to lie with you. 

* Tſab. And at ſuch ealie rates too, ſwear he 1s your Vaſllal, 
and lie at your feet; nothing but lie, cog, flatter, and difſem- 
ble, which can cozen none but overweening ſelf Lovers. . 

Lbdy. Right, Coulin, they can deceive none but thoſe 
that contribute to deceive themſelves. 

Nan. Lord , ſhould one ſuſpe& honeſt Gentlemen, when 
they give one fo good words too ? 

Lady. They that do not ſuſpect, will be more than ſuſpe- 
ced. 

Nan. For what, Madam ? 

Lady. For Fools. 

Naz. But here come the Gentlemen nov, | Madam Tſabell2 
obſerve Sir Fohn Noddy, tis the merrieſt pretty Gentleman. 


Enter Juſtice, $ir John, Colonel, they ſalute the Ladieg. 

Lady. Gentlemen-you are wiltome Sir John how do all 
our. Frie! nds in- your Country .? how dots my Lord your 

(e1ghbour ? 

Sir fohn, Very well, Madan , I was a tunting with my 
dear Lord. t other day, and he lighted, and we all lighted, and 
I ſneaked behind one of. his Gentlemen, and thruſt him into 
a plaſh'of water, ha, ha; ha.” - | 

Juſt, Very g 700d i faith, ha, ha, ha. . 

Sir John. But had you ſeen my Lor&how he laught ,. the 
tcars ran trickling down his Honour's cheeks, he defited-me * 
to forbear', or I ſhould Kill him, then charged every body 
not to ſpeak of it, that he might tell it firſt when he came 


F | | | WN4R- 


(34) 


Na. Madam, did not I tell you, what a pretty , witty, 
wild Gentleman Sir Joh was ? 

Juft. Madam, yonder are Gypſies without have told us 
our Fortunes : if your Ladiſhip pleaſe to hear your's, i'faith 
they are rare men, men of excellent skill, 
| [ He feels in his Pocket. 
- ha, hum, what a Devil, Oh Pox where's my money? O Devil. 

L00y- What's the matter ? have the Gypſies bewitch't 

on : HE 
f Fuſe. O Lord, Oh they or ſome body have pick't my Poc- 
ket of five pound in Silver, and forty pound in old Gold. 

Col. Truly, Juſtice, they are men of skill, excellent skill. 

Sir John. Ha, ha, ha, oh, oh, hum, what have your Pocket 
pick't, Juſtice ? that a man ſhould be ſuch an Aſs ! 

Col. Ha oh, Devil, where is it 2 Ounds, they have done 
the ſame for me, I have loſt every crofs. 

Juſt. Oh, have you fo, Colonel ? 

Sir Joh. I am the Son of a Strumpet, if they have not got 
all mine too. 

Juſt. Ha, ha, ha, Knight, your Pocket pick't! that a man 
ſhould be ſuch an Aſs, Knight! 4 

| ” [The Cook knocks on the Dreſſer, for 

Dinner carrying up. 

Lady. Come, Gentlemen, let's in, the Cook ſammons us to 
Dinner with that knocking 3 comfort your ſelves after your 
loſſes, here is money in the houſe, yourmay make uſe of it, 
Gentlemen, if you pleaſe ; but let's to dinner. 

Juſt. Come, Madam, we wait on you, I ſhall have a hun- 
dred pound paid me by a Fellow that lives hard by ; you 
ſhall have what you will, as far as that goes, Gentlemen. 

[$3r John pulls off bis Periwig, and flings it away. 

Sir John. Thank you, good Sir, there ha, ha, ha, oh, good 
Juſtice, now I am even with you, ha, ha. | 

Juſt. Ha, ha, oh, oh, well go thy ways, I'never ſaw ſuch a 
' merry man in my life. 

Lady. What a ftrange Coycomb 1s this Knight ! Couſto, 
come. ; 
1ſab. He is ſo, but methinks.the other is a handſom Gen- 

| tleman, 


(35) 


tleman, there is a noble roughneſs in his conntenance, that 
ſpeaks an honeſt plainneſs, and a wiſe contempt of thoſe 
Fools he is ia company with; his Mine and Air pleaſes me 
ſtrangely. / 

Lady. Allons, Gentlemen. . | 

Col. We wait on you, Madam. [ Ex. 0mnes. 


mt m—m—_ 


AC LI 


Lady Haughty, Ifabella,Colonel, Juſtice, $;r John Codſhead, 
and Crambo, and Nan at the lower end of the 
" Table at Dinner. 


Sir John. Ome, Madam 71/2be/, are you for ſome Plaice ? 
here is a great Plaice, Ladies love to take place, 
ha, ha, ha. | 

Juſt. Very good, ha, ha, ha. 

Iſab. You are the pleaſanteſt company, Sit Fohx, where do 
you learn theſe things, amongſt the Wits ? 

Sir John. No, Madam , Pox the Wits are dull Fellows, 
they call themſelves Wits , but they are dull, very dull; I 
keep company with the Clinchers, they are the rare com- 

any. | 
n Col Did ever man light into the company of ſuch Fogls ? 
Lady. What are theſe Clinchers ? | 

Sir John. What are they ? why they are the graveſt of 
Divines and Lawyers, Judges will do't upon the Bench at an 
Arraignment, and ſometimes your States-men are good at it, 
they cannot forget when they were Sophilters, 

Juſt. Faith, Madam , theſe Clinchers are the wittieſt peo- 
ple in the World. | 

Lady. Pray, Mr. Spoilwit, cut me a piece of that Rabit. 

Juſt. Madam, it is a raw bit, and not a Rabit, for it is not 
half roaſted, ha, ha. 

Sir John. Ha, ha. 

Crambo. Very good, ha, ha, ha. 

F 2 Codſh, 


£936) 


'Coffh. *Tis very good, the Devil take me. 

Crambo. Again at the Devil ! 

Codſh. Peace, I hope my Lady took no notice on't. 

Col, \ I never knew any great Lady keep above one Fool, 
to Tſab. ſand my Lady has four or five, Madam, 

Iſab. T'think ſhe had beſt put *em in Livery, Sir. 

Faſt. Here is a very good Fowl, will you prove a Gooſe, 
Siri3Fohn 2 ha, ha, ha. 

Sir John. Ha, ha, no; no, but there's. a very good Wond- 
cock, Juſtice, ha, ha, I love a Woodcock Juſtice, ha, ha, 

Crambs. Very good on both fides. . 

Col. That Poet, Madam, 1s a very dull Fellow. 
Tſab: As dull a Poet as one ſhall ſee in a Summers day : 
this man has ſenſe, and looks like a Gentleman. [ Altde, 

Sir John. What are you for a Gull Juſtice ? ha, ha, ha: 

Fuſt. No, no, I had as live's eat of an Owl Sir Fohx, I-love 
not a Gull Sir Joh#, ha, ha, ha, there I gave it him faith, 
Colanel. | 

Sir John, Ha, ha, ha, very good i'faith ; well there is no- 

- thing like this Wit at Dinner. 

Juſt. Wit is never ſo good as at Meals, it makes one di- 
geſt the meat ſo rarely. . 

' Lady. Wit is indeed a fine thing ; but do grave Men, Di- 
'yines, and Lawyers, and-Men of great buſineſs ule this kind 
of Wit? | 

Sir Fobn. Oh ever while you live, they are "the wittic(: 
people, they are ſo full of Jeſts, and will ſo langh, eſpecially 
at Meals, 

Fuſt; Vfaith Sir John's in the right, your Wits, your flaſhy 
Wits are nothing to them, when they pleaſe to be merry. 

Sir John. Oh there was a Judge thar uſe to come our Cir- 
2urf, the pureſt company : a Gentleman ask't a Lady , whe- 
ther ſhe would have any Cuſtard , ſays the Judge Cus-turd, 
you may be aſhamed to name 1o uncivil a thing to ſo fine a 
Gentlewoman, ha,-ha, ha. 

Fuſt. Paſling good, ha, ha; ha. | 

Sir John. There was ſuch laughing, the Ladies'did (o tihie | 
under their Napkias, and could not eat a bit atterit 1faith; | g 

| bu: | 


(37) 
but when they look't moſt demurely, out went the Tihie 
again-under the Napkin, ha, ha. I ama Villain, if the Tihie 
did not take a reverend old Gentlewoman when ſhe was a 
dcinking, and ſhe did ſquirt the Beer out of her Noſe, as an 
Indian does Tobacco, ha, ha. [ They laugh. 

Codſh. This was very good, Gad take me, this would have 
made one laugh like a Devil. 

Crambo. Why, are you mad ? will you ruine your ſelf? 

Codſh. Lord bleſs me, I did quite forget, I was fo tranſpor- 
ted at the Jeſt. 

 Crambo. A Pox on't, I am {o dull], T cannot make a Quib- 
ble, and yet all the bawdy Jelts in my Plays are nothing 
clfe. 

Codſh. Pray, Sir John , give me ſome of that Cuſtard for 
all your Jeſt, I were a Fool, if I ſhould refuſe that Cuſtard, 
ha, ha, ha, that's very good, is not thag-very good, Ladies, ha, 
ha, ha. 

Sir John. Ay faith is it Couſin ? 1a, ha, ha. 

Fuſt. Excellent! we are rare company, talk of your Wits, 
and your Wits, and this and that, 1'faith, they are dull Fools 
to us, 

Col. Gentlemen, if you have leiſure for your immoderate 
and moſt incomprehenſible Wit, which it you do not leave 
It, it will kill you , pray drink my Lady's Health. Madam, 
your Ladithips Health ; Juſtice to you...” [ He drinks. 

Juſt. Tope, 2s the French ſay. 

Sir John. Nay on. my conſcience, as the Colonel fays,'Wit 
will be the death of me, *twill kill me at laſt, 

Codſh. Ay,and me too, the Devil---Oh it was juſt a coming. 

Sir John. Come here's my Lady's Health, about with her, 
I would I could have a bout with her, Jultice, ha, ha: 

7Tuſt. Very good, very good. 

Iſab. Are you not cloy'd with thefe fulſom, nauſeous 
Fools, Madam * 

Lady. No, your groſs Fool 15 good company enough for 
variety, I do not mcan your Fool of God's making, he.1s to 
be pitted 3 but your Fool of his own making, that pretends 
to be witty, one that takes great pains to. make himſelf a 
Eo0]. | Tſabe... 


$ 


| (38) 

T/ab. Not your natura], but artificial Fool. 

Lady. Right, Couſin : Sir Fohr, pray cut me a piece of 
that Cheſhire Cheeſe. 

Sir John. Cheſhire Cheeſe! 'tis Windſor Cheeſe, Madam. 

Lady. Im' ſure it was ſent me by a Friend out of Cheſhire. 

Tab. What makes you call'it Windſor Cheeſe ? 

Sir John. Becauſe it is near Eatoy, ha, ha, ha. 

Fuft. Ha, ha, this is the beſt that ever was, I ſhall die with 
laughing. [They laugh. 

Codſh. Admirable, moſt incomparable. 

Crambo. I am ſo dull, I cannot make one for the blood of 
me. . 

Nan. Sir John is the merrieſt Gentleman, I'le ſwear he 
would kill me to keep him company. 

Sir John. Ha, ha, Tle tell you the beſt Jeſt in the World, 
Madam : a Doctor of Divinity, that ſhall be nameleſs, faid 
that his Wife always gave him three Diſhes, Bitter, Powr, 
and Tart ; was it not very good, Madam ? 

Lady. Oh very good. 

Fuft. Admirable, theſe Joques are excellent things, this 
harmleſs playing upon words, your ſcurvy Wits they are all 
upon things, and men full of Satyr, as they call it. 

Butler. Madam, here's your Grange-man Gervas, and your 
Dairy-maid Cicely have committed Matrimony this day, and 
deſire your Ladiſhip will give 'em joy, and will preſent.you 
with a Dance. | 


Enter Gervas, Cicely, three Country Clowns, and Country 
WWenches with Ribbands upon their Hats. . 


Lady. With all my heart, where are they ? how now, 
Gervas, are you married ? 
4 Gervgs. Yes, Madam, Cicely and I are gone the way of all 

eh. | 

Cicely. He has overcome me, Madam, he has ſuch a way 
with him. . 

Lad J0)7 to ye, Tlegive you your firſt piece of Houſl- 
hold ſtuff. 

Tſab. And I the next. 


Gervas. 


(39) 


Gervas, Thank your Worſhips. 

Lady. But where's our Dance ? 

Gervas. Strike up, Muſicians. 
[ They riſe, and the Table and Cloth _ is taken away. 


They dance. 

Lady. Vety well; farewel, much joy to you. Gentlemen, 
let us retire, and about half an hour hence Ile meet ye all 1n 
the Garden. [ Ex. Gervas,Cicely, and Dancers. 

Col. to) Madam, will you give me leave to wait upon you 

T/abel. {tor a moment ? 

Lady. 1 hope, Mr. Crambo, you are pleaſed to remember 
your promiſe of a little Poetry. 

Crambo. 1 do, Madam ; Pox on that Colonel, he's going 
with my Cloris - I am troubled with dulneſs, I have ſuch va- 
pours in my head, I am not able to write, [ fear. 

[Sir John puſhes one of the Servants with the Ser- 
vice full of Trenchers, Plates, and Diſhes upon his 
Noſe, they all go out laughing ated hugging Siv 
John, except the Butler and Servants, who are re- 
moving the things. Then Exeunt all but the But- 
ler. © To him 


Enter Margery the Chamber- Maid. 


Butler. Ah, Margery, have you the facs to look on me, af- 
ter what I ſaw juſt now before Dinner ? 

Marg. Why, what did you fee, good Mr. Butler and Tay- 
lor ? for thoſe are your two Titles of Honour. 

Butl, Did not I ſeeyou im a cornerdaughing and playing 
with Sir Fohy Noddy's Man ? 

Marg. Would not you have one civil to a Stranger? you 
11]-bred Taylor. 

Butl, Civil with a Pox d'e call it ? 

Marg. What you are jealous, are you ? I defy your Yard 
and your Spaniſh Needle, and your middle finger, with your 


Corſlet Thimble. 
Bxtl. Marry come up, Mrs. cub Keeper of 
my. 


(49). 
my Lady;s ſecrets! you would hold the door for a need, if 
my Lady were fach'a one; ris well her Ladiſhip is not ay 
given, I know what you would be. elſe, 

. Marg. Why what would I be, thou Gooſe ? 

Butl. A Rawd, a Bawd, a Bawd Margery. 

Marg. A Thi © a Thick, a Thief Faxes, I'm fure one can- 
not be a Taylor without it. 

Butl, You ſcurvy tittle tattle, Tell-tale of the' houſl >, that 
makes lies, and are believ'd, fat: rs my Lady, and ſays the 
Crow's white, if ſhe ſays fo, all this for a little Money and 
Cloaths, and then you mince and trip and amble to Church, 
not for Religion, but to ſhow my Lady's old Wardrobe far- 
biiht up upon thy ſeurvy body. 

Marg. Scurvy body ! out you Prick-louſe, 'tis as good a 
body and that moſt young Men of the houſe will ſay, 
thou unconſcionable Item of ſearing Candle, Bumbaſt, and 
Canvas. | 

Butl. There's ſtiffening too, good Mrs. Waſp, with a ſting 
1n your tal). 

Marg. Not ſo much as you ſhould have put in, you cheat- 
ing-Rogue, you, cozened,me 1a that too. 

Butl. Come you are rank, you are rank, every Dog-bolt 
in the houſe follows you, w ith a Pox to you, that will be the 
end of it, to thy ſhame, thou laſcivious Woman. 

Marg. Oh you baſe Taylor and Butler made up of ſhreds 
and chippings, ne're a one of the houſe will ſay fo much of 
me. 

Brtl. 'T1s their goodneſs more than your deſcrt. 

Atarg. T am ſure never a Fellow of mine, fince I came, if 

they ſpeak truly, byy will fay I have been ready to do 'em 
courtelies early and late, ] am ſure of that. 

Butl. Her ,tcars do mollific me, 1 am tender- hearted. . 

Marg. crys. ] And you to lay theſe things in 1, My difb, that 
have not deſerv'd *em at your hands. 

::Butl, Well le ſay no more at preſent "ona « 

Atarg. But 'tis no matter, I am cen ſerved well eno! ugh, to 
love ſuch alone; [ thought ne're to have ſaid ſo much, 'but 
eruth's ruth: and ſhame the Devil. | 


But l, 


ms, *?
