Requested Title: IPHIGENIA
Authors: John Dennis
Matched Anchor: IPHIGENIA
TCP: A35670
EEBO: 11773768
Source Title: Iphigenia a tragedy, acted at the theatre in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields / by Mr. Dennis.
Source Author: Dennis, John, 1657-1734.; Euripides. Iphigenia in Tauris.
Source Date: 1700
Source URL: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/A35670/master/A35670.xml
Metadata Score: 1.400
Unit Score: 1.000

---

IPHIGENIA. A TRAGEDY, Acted at the THEATRE IN LITTLE LINCOLNS-INN-FIELDS
By Mr DENNIS
LONDON, Printed for Richard Parker, at the Ʋ nicorn under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1700
Dramatis Personae
MEN
Orestes, King of Mycenae
Pilades, A Grecian Prince, his Friend
Helymus Two Grecians, attendant on the Princes
Diores. Two Grecians, attendant on the Princes
Two Scythian Captains
Messengers
Ma Betterton
Mr Williams
WOMEN
Queen of the Scythians
Iphigenia
Euphrosine, a Grecian Lady, Confi dent to Iphigenia
Delia, another Grecian Lady, Priestess of Diana Taurica
Priests and Priestesses
Mrs Barry
Mrs Bracegirdle
Mrs Martin
SCENE, A Wild Country on the top of a Mountain before the Temple of Diana Taurica
To my Worthy Friend Mr JOHN FREEMAN
SIR,
SIR,
O Restes, upon his arrival from Greece, is drawn by sympathy to take up his station with so good a Friend as you are. He could per haps have made a choice that the world would have esteem'd more preferable and more illustrious. But, he judges not as the world judges. The Title of Friend is to him more atractive than a ny in the Court of Honour; nay, he esteems it too more glorious. Virtue, Good Sense and Greatness of mind are requir'd to make a Friend; and where-ever he meets with those qualities he finds true Nobility. In you, indeed, he makes choice of a Person who derives no glori ous Title from his Father, but who inhe rits from him the truest Honour, that of an unblemish'd Character, the Character of an upright frank, understanding, sincere man. One who has greatness of mind enough to know that he was not born for himself, and who loves Mankind, the noble com munity, of which he was made a member. One who is constantly true to himself, and constantly just to others, and always easie both to himself and others, agreea ble to Strangers, dear to his Friends, and good to his very Enemies. As such he visits you, assur'd before-hand of his kind Reception, tho more upon the ac count of his generous friendship, than any other merit he brings. I am,
SIR, Your most obliged Humble Servant, John Dennis
SIR,
Your most obliged Humble Servant, John Dennis
PREFACE
MY chief design in writing the following Poem was to contribute my Mite towards the being serviceable to the publick. And I thought I could not do that more effectually than by endeavouring to enflame the Minds of an Audience with the Love of so noble a Virtue as Friendship. For all Communities owe their prosperity to their being united amongst them selves, and derive their ruin from Faction and Intestine Discord. The misfortunes of England have always hap pened from particular persons loving themselves too much, and others too little, and taking too little care of the publick, and too much of themselves. He who is generous enough to love his Friend, has greatness of mind enough to serve his Country: The Virtues have always been inseparable, and never was there an excel lent Friend, but he was a good Patriot
The subject that I chose in order to my design has been handled by several; yet the Fable or Plot is intirely my own. I consider, that the Writing of good Verses may make a man a good Verfifyer, but 'tis the forming a Fable alone, that can make a Poet. I therefore han dled it with all the Care, and with all the Art which I was capable of bestowing on it; I chiefly took care to form it as regularly as possibly I could, that is, as Rea sonably, as Decently, as Greatly, and as Virtuously; and to make it more agreeable, I endeavoured to reconcile Variety to Regularity: For Irregularity in the Drama, like Irregularity in Life, is downright extra vagance, and extravagance both upon the Stage, and in the World is always either Vice or Folly, and is often both
At the same time I am far from thinking that any ob servation of the Rules can make amends for want of Genius, I have the lesson of my Master too constantly in my mind, to be guilty of such a mistake
Ego nec Studium sine divite vena,
Nec rude quid prosit video ingenium alterius sic
Altere poscit opem res and conjurat amice
Here we see it is the opinion of Horace that the Rules signifie nothing without Genius; but here we see it is his opinion too that Genius signifies nothing without the Rules. Milton as to this latter point was exactly of Horace 's mind. Milton, who is perhaps the greatest Ge nius that has appear'd in the world for these seventeen hundred years, declares that Genius without the Rules is despicable. In the little Treatise of Education which he has writ to Mr Hartlib, he tells him that he would have his young Students learn something of Poetry. I mean not (says he) the prosody of a Verse, but that sublime art which in Aristotle 's Poeticks, in Horace, and c. teaches what the laws are of a true Epick Poem, what of a Dramatick, what of a Lyrick, what Decorum is, which is the grand Master-piece to observe. This would make them soon perceive what despicable Crea tures our common Rhymers and Play-Writers are, and shew them what Religious, what Glorious and Mag nificent use might be made of Poetry, both in Divine and in Humane things
That the present Tragedy is more Regular than most of our Tragedies are, I have some grounds to believe. Whether there is in it what is requir'd on the account of Genius, must be determin'd by the knowing Impartial Reader; that is, whether the Passions are touch'd, whe ther the Expressions are worthy of the Passions, and whether there reigns throughout it that majestick Sad ness which makes the pleasure of Tragedy
For I declare here solemnly that it was never my in tention to satisfie those who expect to be entertain'd with what they call fine things; I know a great deal better what the nature of my Art and the simplicity of the Drama demands, than to leave what the necessity of the action requires, whose vehement motion alone can in flame an audience, and hunt for Impertinent Common-place Wit. As often as I write I shall endeavour to adapt my Sentiments to my Characters and to my Incidents, and make my Expressions fit for my Sentiments, and aban don all fine reflections to be written by half Wits, and approv'd of by half Criticks. But to return to the Rules from which I digress'd; I had not said so much of them, but that I find it is the daily practice of our Empiricks in Poetry to turn our two Theatres into down right Mountebanks Stages, to treat Aristotle and Horace with as contemptuous arrogance, as our Medicinal Quacks do Galen and the great Hippocrates; and to endea vour to make the Rules, that is, Nature and Right Reason, as ridiculous and contemptible as the Rules have made their Writings
The subject of the following Tragedy has al ways been esteem'd so noble, that it has prevail'd upon the Writers of several Ages, and of several Na tions to entertain the publick with it. It was late ly brought upon the French Stage by one Monsieur de la Grange, and, as he tells us in his Preface, with extraordinary success. Tho he seems to me to have treated this subject without Force and without Art, yet I am very apt to believe him, because its greatness might very well sustain it. It was brought upon the Roman Stage by Pacuvius about the time of the great Sci pio: And we find from the little Treatise that Cicero has left us of Friendship, the wonderful effect that that Tragedy had upon the minds of the Romans. Qui clamoris (says Lelius in that Treatise) tota cavea nuper, hospitis and Amici mei Marci Pacuvii fuerunt in nova fa bula, cum ignorante rege uter eorum esset Orestes, Pylades Orestem se esse diceret ut pro illo necaretur; Orestes autem, ita ut erat, Orestem se esse perseveraret? What shouts of applause ran lately through the whole Pit at the new Play of my Guest and Friend Pacuvius; when the King inquiring which was Orestes, Pilades affirm'd it was he, that he might be sacrific'd in his stead; but Orestes persever'd in the contrary. About four hun dred years before that, and above two thousand years before our time, it was brought upon the Athenian Stage by Euripides; and the Athenians, who were certainly the most ingenicus, and most delicate people that ever were in the world, were not only charm'd, but ravish'd with it. Aristotle, who in his little Treatise of Poetry drew his Rules from his constant observation of what had succeeded upon the Athenian Stage, is every where in that Treatise speaking of the Iphigenia in Tauris. He gives himself the trouble of laying down the general Plan of it: He commends the Discovery of Iphigenia to Orestes. He extols the incidents, as admirably contriv'd for exciting Compassion and Terror. In short, he is eve ry where speaking of that Tragedy and the Oedipns of Sophecles. These considerations gave me encouragement to try how it would do upon our English Theatre: And from the first representations I expected all the success that I could reasonably desire, I never in my life at any Play took notice of a more strict attention, or a more profound silence. And there was something like what happen'd at the Representation of Pacuvius his Tragedy. For upon Orestes discovering his passion to Iphigenia in the fourth Act, there ran a general murmur through the Pit, which is what I had never seen before. But after three or four representations, several people, who du ring that time had wholly abandon'd themselves to the Impression which Nature had made on them, began to study how to be discontented by Art; and repented heartily at having been pleas'd with what Athens and Rome and Paris had been pleas'd before. But if they answer, that they were displeas'd at my defects, and not at those beauties which so justly pleas'd the Ancients, and which please the Moderns; to that I reply, that by universal confession they were more touch'd by the fourth and fifth Acts than they were by the second. Now the fourth and fifth Acts are entirely my own, and the second is almost entirely Euripides. Yet this ve ry ▪ Act made little impression on them after the first representations. Is it that they were resolv'd all at once to set up for being more Refin'd than the French, more Discerning than the Romans, and more Delicate than the Athenians! I desire them to consider what ap probations they have here of late given, and what ap probations they have been forc'd to retract, and then they may answer the question
Of all the Objections which have been made, but two appear to me to be of any moment. The first relates to the first Scene of the Play, which objection is universal; and therefore must be solid. The second belongs to the last Scene of the Play, and has been made by persons of extraordinary merit, and who have a hundred great qua lities, of which their exalted Rank and exalted Birth are the least. The objection is this, That Orestes upon discovering Iphigenia to be his Sister shews too much joy for a Lover. But I desire them, with all the profound Respect that is due to them, that I may say three words in my Defence, and desire that they would not upon a transient reflection condemn me for a thing which I have been considering for a year. A person of Orestes 's 〈...〉 may very well be suppos'd to love his Mistress 〈...〉 own sake: And how very natural is it 〈...〉 of grief, into which the sight of her 〈...〉 thrown him, a Danger by him believ'd unavoidable, should be turn'd into •••• tuous tran sports of Joy upon the first view of her Deliverance? He saw very well that this Discovery was the only thing that could have deliver'd her, unless he would have parted with his Honour to save her. Besides, he had from the very beginning esteem'd and admir'd the Queen, as he declares in the third Act. She had twice in one day given him his Life and his Liberty, to which she had added his Friends Life and Liberty; she had given him the disposal of her self and her Subjects, and be stow'd an Empire on him. And what Impression must not such Generosity make upon the soul of a generous man? And how far might it not go, upon a discovery that must immediately cool the violence of his former love into the calmness of fraternal affection? Besides, consider the circumstances of that astonishing Discovery. A young Princess, whom he and all Greece believ'd to have been inhumanely murder'd at the Altar of Diana in Aulis, a Princess who had been at ten years of age the admiration of her Country, the joy of her Relations, and the darling of the Prince her Brother; a Princess, whose unfortunate Beauty and untimely Fate all Greece with him had lamented, and look'd on it as one of the deplorable deeds, Hereditary to the Race of Tantalus: this very Princess was twelve years after beyond all ex pectation, beyond all hope, and almost beyond all be lief, discover'd by this very Brother to be alive in Tauris, and discover'd in the wonderful moment, in which that very discovery sav'd her from perishing in so remote a Country, at the Altar of the same Goddess. Judge if such an astonishing discovery as this could have had a ny other effect in nature upon the mind of Orestes, than what I have given it in this Tragedy? A discovery, which not only sav'd his dearest Sister, and made happy his dearest Friend, but reconciled him perfectly to the Queen, oblig'd her to abandon the fatal Image to him, and so fulfill'd the command of Heaven, and appeas'd the Infernal Powers, and restor'd him to his former tran quility
Thus I have endeavour'd as briefly as I could to an swer this objection, out of respect to the persons who made it. For the rest I leave them to be answer'd by the Reader. If they are solid, nothing that I can say can o'rethrow them, and if they are not founded on Reason, they will be sure to fall of themselves. For all opinions are sure to change, and prejudice and malice are sure to dye; only Reason is always the same, and only Truth is immortal
The general success of the following Poem has been neither dispicable nor extraordinary. I have pleas'd those whom I desir'd to please, and the rest will one day follow. But let the Writers value themselves upon Fortune, who have nothing else to rely on. To which of her scribbling Favourites has she not been kind, has she not been coming? But short have been her fantastick favours, her affections fleeting, and general contempt, a terrible reverse, has follow'd. 'Tis my Ambition to owe my Success to Reason, and not to Chance, to please the most judicious and the best of men, and so to please for ever
PROLOGUE
Spoke by Mr Verbruggen
The Genius of England rises to a Warlike Symphony
SEe, Britt •• , see, before your ravish'd eyes,
See England 's lofty Guardian Genius rise
Admiring see that formidable mien,
That is by Gods with veneration seen;
That from great Neptune due Respect can draw,
And keep the watry trembling world in awe
I, who • our Souls with all that s great inspire,
With soaring thoughts, and each sublime desire;
'Tis I, my Brittons, who vouchsafe t' appear,
And. 〈...〉 God like Sons assembled here
And 〈...〉 set you assembled all,
At 〈...〉 of my Majestic call
〈...〉 the Tragick Muse I have led,
Who had 〈◊〉 • olling Moons been from you fled,
Forlorn, forsaken, the Celestial Maid
In Solitudes disconsolat •• straid
Wild as a Bacchanal I saw her rove,
This 〈◊〉 Child of Memory and Jove
Her once victorious eye now look'd Despair,
With miserable cries she rent the air,
Beat her Immortal Breasts, and tore her golden Hair
Am I by all forsaken then! said she
Oh is my Brittain faln to that degree,
As for effeminate Arts t' abandon me?
I left the enslav'd Italian with disdain,
And servile Gallia, and dejected Spain
Grew proud to be confin'd to Brittain 's shore,
Where Godlike Liberty had fix'd before;
Where Liberty thrives most, I most can soar
Once more I thought t' inspire Athenian flights,
And once more towr to Sophoclean heights
But oh, she cry'd, I feel a Ruder care,
And I have chang'd Ambition for Despair
Here Song and Dance, and ev'ry Trifle reigni,
And leaves no room for my exalted strains
Those Arts now rule that soften'd foreign Br •• es,
And sunk the Southern Nations into Slaves
This said the Muse, my Brittons, against you
Oh Supreme Jove! And 〈...〉
It is; so wanton are you 〈...〉
That my Degenerate Sons I have 〈...〉
Or what is worse, ye 〈...〉
Oh what wou'd my 〈...〉
Or Edward 's Soul returning 〈...〉
To see a Bearded more 〈...〉
Dissolv'd and dying by 〈...〉
To give you wholeso •• 〈...〉
With me the Tragick 〈...〉
To your soft neighbours 〈...〉
But listen you to ••• great 〈...〉
'Tis true, the 〈...〉
But what can weaken our 〈...〉
Where cannot we exert our 〈...〉
Yet from his mortal voice 〈...〉
Whatever in the following Scen • 〈...〉
Whate're may from 〈...〉
That's his, from that 〈...〉
But to what's ours 〈...〉
And ours is all that's brave and 〈...〉
And which can raising 〈...〉
Friendship's the virtue which we 〈...〉
He makes a Patriot too who makes a 〈...〉
Who freely for his Friend re •• gns his 〈...〉
Would for his Country meet a glorious 〈◊〉
With silent awe, my Brittons then attend,
View the great Action of a Grecian Friend,
And learn degenerate 〈◊〉 thoughts t' amend
From Grecian fire let English hearts take flame,
And grow deserving of that noble name ▪
For not the boundless Main which I controul,
•• n so delight my Eye • or charm my Soul,
As I am pleas'd when my brave Sons I see
Worthy of Godlike Liberty and me
He sinks to the same Symphony that he rose
IPHIGENIA
ACT I. Storm
Iphigenia. Euphrosine
Iph
DEfend me, great Diana!
Defend thy Iphigenia, thou bright Goddess,
The wretched Servant of whose cruel rites
Before thy Sacred Temple here I stand!
A Storm so dreadful my eyes ne're beheld,
Not ev'n in this accursed Scythian Climate,
O're which the furious God of War presiding,
The restless 〈...〉 and the outrageous elements
All 〈...〉 War
Euph
〈...〉 something surely above Nature in it
Iph
〈...〉 Storm's so terrible to us,
How must it look, alas, to those poor Souls,
With conqu'ring Death conflicting on the Main!
Look there Euphrosine 's a fight will melt
Thy pitying heart within thy tender bosom;
See, in the mouth of this tempestuous Bay,
Upon the Sommet of whose horrid Cliffs
This threatning Fabrick stands,
Yon goodly Vessel, of a foreign make,
No Pilot to conduct it but the Tempest,
Before the foaming surges bounds along
Euph
Bless me, ye pow'rs! what god can save them sinking?
Shou'd they scape foundring in the wild Abyss,
Anon they run amain upon the Rocks
Of this inhospitable shore
Iph
Or if by wondrous chance they avoid those Rocks,
Something more dangerous than the Rocks or Seas,
And rougher than the rudest of the Winds
Attends them on the shore
Euph
If they are caught on Scythian ground they dye,
And fall the Victims of these dreadful Altars
Iph
They die, but by whose hands, Euphrosine?
Ah miserable me! Tho in this place
The men are more relentless than the Rocks,
Yet here are always Women to be found
More savage than the cruelst of their men
Enter Messenger
Whence art thou? And to whom?
Mess
From you uncultivated Eastern Plain,
O're which our Roving Scythians drive
Their wandring Habitations,
Our warlike Queen has sent me to demand,
If all things are prepar'd to solemnize
Our great Diana 's Annual Festival
Iph
Tell her they are
The Garlands are prepar'd the Victim's crown'd,
The Sacred Pomp of the Procession's ready,
And nothing but the Queen herself is wanting;
For now the night, the fatal hour approaches
Mess
I fly to let her know it
Exit
Iph
Ah woe, Euphrosine! But yesterday
This fatal office was conferr'd upon me,
Which to refuse had brought me certain Death,
And yet this night already I must—Heav'ns!
My Blood runs chill within me, at the thought
Of executing this most horrid office
Euph
Yes, you're to plunge your Knife in human Blood;
But 'tis the Blood of Strangers
Were you to offer up your darling Child,
Or to embrue your Hands in the dear Blood
Of one who lov'd you, and was belov'd by you,
How then wou'd your poor trembling Heart recoil
At the bare thought of such a dreadful office!
Yet, Iphigenia from a Race descends,
To which from Tantalus to Agamemnon,
Those dismal deeds have been but too familiar;
You sacrifice a Stranger to Diana,
Remember that your Father Agamemnon
A Daughter wou'd have sacrific'd
Iph
O dire Original of all my woe!
Why, my Euphrosine, wou'dst thou remind me of it?
To that intention of a cruel Father
I owe a tedious twelve years misery;
I owe a tedious twelve years residence
In this sad Clime, where Heav'ns inclemency
Frowns all the year upon the Horrid Natives
Where I must linger out a wretched life,
Far from my Country, and my dear Relations,
Far from the sweet society of Ladys,
Whose Souls with ev'ry Grace and Virtue fraught,
Alone can by their Conversation give
Insipid life a Relish
'Tis now five years since the last wretched Grecian
Was thrown upon this Coast, and I alas
Am utterly a stranger to whate're
Has happen'd to my Country and my Friends;
Only last night, last feardful night, Orestes,
My only Brother, and the second hope
Of Royal Agamemnon 's High born Race,
Broke my distracted slumbers with dire Visions,
That quite dismay'd my Soul; my very Dreams
All in this place, are like the Natives, dreadful
Euph
However, you exclaim against those Natives,
To you, they are less barbarous than your Grecians,
And far more gentle than a cruel Father
To them you owe your Liberty, your Honour,
To them too next the Gods you owe the punishment
Of a curst Slaves design upon them both ▪
When for 〈◊〉 space of three revolving Moons ▪
The Grecian •• eet had windbound lain at Aulis,
And great Achilles longing lay, impatient
To urge the Trojan Fate;
Calchas aloud proclaim'd throughout the Army
That the offended Gods deny'd the Winds,
Till that the King of Kings, who stood oblig'd
By an old Vow, to offer to Lucina
The loveliest product of the fertile year,
Should sacrifice his Beauteous Iphigenia
Iph
Why wilt thou old Calamities renew?
Euph
To reconcile you more to your misfortune,
And shew you what great things the Gods have done for you,
Tho you ungratefully repine, the King
By damnable Ambition urg'd, consented
To what the Camp with one accord demanded,
And make your Marriage with the great Achilles,
The subtle lure to draw you down from Argos ▪
Iph
The fraud of Calchas and of dire Ulysses!
False fatal Marriage ▪
Euph
And tho true, untimely,
Scarce had ten Springs then bloom'd upon your Cheek,
And yet your tender Mother Clytemnestra,
Betray'd and flatter'd by the hope of seeing
Your Destiny united to a Hero's,
And such a Heroe from a Goddess sprung
Too soon consented to the fatal Journey
Iph
I wou'd not hear the rest
Euph
You must; at Aulis
The subtle Clytemnestra found the Cheat,
Then like a Raging Lyoness, whose young
Some desperate Hunter in the Toils entangles,
Your Raving Mother soon dismay'd your Father,
Flew to his Tent with Fury in her Soul
And Terror in her Eyes, storm'd, wept, pray'd, shriek'd,
Till she at last prevail'd on his hard heart;
So far she shook his fainting resolution
Iph
What canst thou mean by this sad repetition
Of what I wou'd not hear?
Euph
Once more, I tell you,
To reconcile you to your Scythian Fate
For to that strange degree you were undone,
That only Scythia 's shore cou'd have preserv'd you
From a worse Fate than that from which you fled
For after that your Mother had prevail'd
Upon your Father to retract your Destiny,
It was determin'd that at dead of night
You shou'd by stealth from Aulis be convey'd,
To Thracian Polimnestor 's Court,
There to remain conceal'd till the event
Of that fam'd Expedition
And that a Lesbian Slave in shape and size,
And age resembling yours,
In a long Veil should dye for Iphigenia;
So you escap'd, and so all Greece was cheated
Iph
Unfortunate escape! for that which follows
Was ten times worse than Death, and barely mention'd
Strikes to my Heart like Fate, and shakes my Nature
Euph
Yet I must on; your peace of mind depends on it
That day it happen'd that there came to Aulis
A Master of a Vessel in his Boat,
Whose Ship lay out some leagues at Sea,
Being bound for the Propontis
The Master was by Birth of Tomos;
The Country where the Isther
It self at all its sev'n wide mouths
Discharges in the Euxine
To him you were deliver'd, with large Treasures,
And six small Virgins of your Train, of which
My wretched self was one
To be convey'd to Thracian Polimnestor
With him we at the Ship arriv'd, and sail'd
But then that Beauty, which at Land had made you
The most unfortunate of women
Had like to have prov'd more fatal on the Main;
For fir'd by that, and by the Treasure tempted,
The Captain past by Thrace and the Propontis,
Designing to transport us all to Tomos
Iph
Oh the Villain!
Euph
As soon as in the Euxine, all the world
Appear'd to be compos'd but of two Elements;
The desperate Caitiff made a damn'd attempt;
We helpless wretches shriek'd to Heaven for succour,
When strait upon the wings of all the winds
Th' avenging Gods flew down from Heav'n to Rescue us,
Jove gave th' alarm to Nature, strait the Thunder
From different quarters roar'd, and the Blue Lightning
Thwarted the Lightning in its slanting flight;
The Sea Gods in a moment turn'd the Seas
Up from their deep Foundation
They roaring out, in liquid Mountains roll'd,
With intervals of horrid Vales between them,
While •••• aming Monsters eccho'd to our shrieks,
Death in a thousand shapes at once appear'd,
And each of them amazing
Iph
The very bare remembrance of that Storm
Still strikes a thrilling Horror to my Heart,
The terriblest I ever saw
Before I saw this ev'ning
Euph
Yet 'twas by that that gracious Heav'n preserv'd us;
For now the Vessel tumbling in the Abyss,
The King of Terrors in his dismalst shape
Star'd in the Villains face, and made him soon
Desist from his curst enterprize
A sharper care now seiz'd his guilty Soul
Three days and nights adrift before the Storm
We in the Deep lay rolling, on the fourth
The Tempest wrack'd us on this Scythian shore;
We strait were by the Natives seizd, the Master
And all his Crew, the Crew of guilty wretches
Who would have sacrific'd our spotless Honours
To their infernal lusts, that very night
Yielded their throats at great Diana 's Altars
We were preserv'd, and constituted part
Of the bright train attendant on the Goddess
Iph
See, thou hast talk'd this ▪ Tempest over too;
But ah the goodly Ship is seen no more,
And all the wretches in its hollow womb
Are perish'd in the waves; and now alas
The Elements seem reconcil'd, and now
The angry Ocean sinks into a Calm,
As if it like a Hungry Lyon roar'd
But for its prey, and were by that appeas'd
But look, Euphrosine, what two are those
Who with such friendly care assist each other
To climb the craggy steepness of the Cliff,
While two at distance with unequal pace
Pursuing, pant behind them?
Euph
The wretched Remnants of the Wreck,
Who come to perish here
Iph
Strangers they by their garb appear, and Grecians;
With what laborious toil they mount,
And ever and anon
They stop, and cast an eager eye
Tow'rds these Tremendrous Altars!
Euph
The foremost wears affliction in his aspect,
And the black Cloud that lowrs upon his Brow
Seems to declare strange wretchedness of sorrow
Iph
Yet sorrow on his Brow majestick sits,
And shows that from no common cause it springs
His mien seems earnest, and his looks profound,
Like one upon important business bent
Ah wretch! if thou art by our Scythians seen,
Thy business is to dye
But let's retire, and let th' Attendants bar
These massy Gates, for lo they come, Euphrosine
Enter Orestes, Pilades, Helymus, Diores
Euph
Shall we alarm the Guards?
Iph
Not for thy life
My first request to great Diana, is,
That I may ne're perform this cruel function
For that which Reason utterly abhors
Can ne're be acceptable to Divinity
But if I am compell'd by these Batharians
To do a deed which most my Soul abhors,
Let the Slaves destin'd for the Altar, bleed
But spare your Images, ye pow'rs above,
In those two Godlike Youths
Exeunt Iph. Euph
Or
You Helymus, and you Diores,
Keep exact watch upon your several posts,
If we are caught on Scythian ground we die
Ex. Hel. Di
I fear not for my self, why shou'd a wretch
That groans beneath intolerable woe,
Fear Death, his kind Redeemer?
But for my Friend, my Pilades,
I cannot chuse but fear
Pil
I cannot fear with my Orestes near me,
Not even for Orestes?
Or
Alas, you need not fear for me,
I am so exquisitely miserable
That Death will long avoid me;
A wretch that labours with a world of woe;
By all but my Pilades forsaken,
By Gods and men forsaken,
And by the formidable Furies haunted
Pil
Now your long miseries must cease, take comfort,
The Delphick God has said it
This is the Temple of the Dreadful Goddess,
Whose cruel Altars smoke with Human gore,
If we her Image can transport to Athens
Your woes are at an end
So said Diyine Apollo
Or
See, where that Image sits, inthron'd in Horror,
And on the Bloody Battlements behold
The spoils of murder'd Grecians
The dreadful Gates are barr'd,
And the high Walls prohibit all access
May we not justly then suspect this Oracle?
For how can we approach this fatal Image,
Or how can we transport it?
Pil
When we despair,
Great Love shall crown our action with success,
And from the Dangers of the place deliver us
So said the God, upon our Virtue then,
Upon our Friendship firmly let's depend,
Immortal Love ne're stirs a moment from us
Or
Above the world, I swear I love my Pilades
Then let us to the Ship retire,
That lies among the Rocks conceal'd,
And with the advantage of approaching night,
Sally with all our Friends,
Surprize and force the place
Enter Helymus, and after him Diores
How now? what means that ghastly look!
Hast thou too seen the Furies? Why standst thou speechless?
What means that deep fetcht groan? Why does Despair
Stare thro thy haggard eyes?
Hel
My Lords defend your selves
For from the Brow of yonder neighb'ring Hill
A party of the Scythians have surpriz'd me;
Their reinless Steeds come scowring down the Mountain
As they had Wings, and seem to bend their course
Directly tow'rds the Temple
Or
It is enough, my Pilades retire,
In the good Ship thy refuge quickly take,
While I with Helymus and good Diores
Keep these inhumane Dogs that hunt for Blood at bay
Pil
Had I made that Request to my Orestes ▪
By Heav'n I ne're shou'd have forgiv'n my self,
Because Orestes ne're could have forgiven me
Should Pilades have ask'd his only friend
To be so false, so infinitely base
As to desert him; one day I must dye,
That is most certain, and who knows how poorly,
How like the base born vulgar?
Cou'd I have ever wish'd to have faln more nobly,
Than fighting, dying for my Dear Orestes?
How shou'd a Friend expire but with his Friend?
And not when Death has seiz'd his nobler part
Drag a half wretched paralytick life,
His own forlorn Surviver
Why wouldst thou then unkindly thus deprive me
Of such a Death as I shou'd envy thee?
Then as we have liv'd, let us embracing dye
Now let them come. Had they attack'd me only,
I wou'd have giv'n my wretched Breast to them,
That groans beneath th' intolerable weight
Of never ceasing woe
But since through mine they seek the life of Pilades,
By Castor, and the friendly God his Brother,
They'll find they safelier might have undertaken
To have rousd the Hungry Monarch of the Woods,
While slumbring o're his young
Enter Queen of the Scythians, and Train
Queen
Give orders that the Horse remain at distance,
Let these on foot attend me to the Temple,
There's something sad in my foreboding mind
T ••• s unbecoming of this pompous Festival
〈◊〉 night, w • en Death-like Sleep had seiz'd on Mortals,
In the dread hour to silent Horror sacred,
This in the Visions of the Dark I saw,
The •••• ings of th' Apartment where I lay
Flew open with a Whi •• wind • violent blast,
And to my eyes appear'd th' amazing form
Of 〈...〉 Goddess
With 〈...〉 her head 〈...〉
Her 〈...〉 wrathful frown 〈...〉 ,
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉 the Fates •• reed
She 〈...〉 Dreams are Dreams,
All 〈...〉 great Souls,
And I will think no more of it
Seeing the Grecians
Ha! 〈...〉 with Arms unlicenc'd,
And 〈...〉
〈...〉 that calls me Soveraign!
Or
〈...〉 at us, we are men,
And 〈...〉 ne're saw befor •
Queen
Yes, I'm a woman, born to command men
Pil
No, to command Barbarians, we are Grecians
Queen
By your exalted Speech and touring Meins,
I took you to be Gods;
But if you're Grecians, we shall find you mortal
For if you're Grecians, know that you must dye
Or
Then know that we resolve to die like Grecians,
Like two who know that we were born to die
Pil
That ev'ry brave mans business is to die
Or
Th' Employment of your Scythians is to kill,
But the whole business of a Grecians life
Is like himself to die
Pil
For Death is only certain, all things else
Depend on Fortune's Arbitrary freak,
And may or may not happen, Death is Fate's,
And only sure and common to us all
Queen
Gods how they talk! I'll see what they can do
Fall on
Or
Now the two friendly Brother Gods assist us
They beat off the Scythians
Queen
Gods! what have I beheld? with what a fury
They drove my Dastard Scythians all before the •
As Whirlwinds drive the D ••••
Protect me, great 〈...〉 !
Orestes, P • l ••• s ▪ Helymu • Di ••• s 〈...〉
Or
Now Madam you may see, that th • we 〈...〉
Grecians, are yet as fa • a •••• your 〈...〉
As they're below the gods ▪ But you are 〈...〉
Expecting we should 〈...〉
Because your 〈...〉
But we are able to 〈...〉
The high prerogative 〈...〉
Your Subjects, as by 〈...〉 they 〈...〉
In all their Combate 〈...〉
Greatness of mind exci ••• 〈...〉
Who conquers only to 〈...〉
And to improve the vanquish'd
That you shall see, your life, your 〈...〉
Your Scepter's yours once more; 〈...〉
To shew more mercy to unhappy 〈...〉
Farewel
Queen
Gods! Have I liv'd to hear such 〈...〉
'Tis not the easie Conquers they obtain'd
That mortifies my pride; what's 〈...〉
I have a greatness of my own, a greatness
Immortal, like my Soul in which it dwells,
And ne're can suffer by my Subjects buseness
But this is what torment • me, I have heard,
Gods! I have heard them say such things, as shows
They who pronounc'd them thought they were to me
Superiour beings; but by Heav'n once more
I'll have them in my power, and then I'll shew them—
Re enter Scythians
Oh! are you then return'd at last? you wretches!
What can you think your selves that you deserve?
When twenty of you, with true Scythian Scimitars,
Fled from four Greecian Swords
1 Scyth
Pardon, great Queen, we fled not from their Swords,
Their eyes had something more than mortal in them;
We could not bear their darting beams, which shot
Pernicious Fire thro all our daring Souls,
That in a moment blasted all our vigour
Queen
Give order, that the Horse immediately
Fly down the Road that winds around the Cliff,
And intercept their passage to the Sea;
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
As much as 〈...〉 ;
She 〈...〉 Soul,
A 〈...〉
Which 〈...〉 Breath of Jove,
And 〈...〉
To all 〈...〉
〈...〉 can know thy worth,
No • 〈...〉 , who • o proudly
Gave 〈...〉
That 〈...〉 patent longs
To pay the mighty Debt in • ind. What then?
Thy Conscience knows it, and Immortal Jove
And the bright eye of you ▪ Refulgent Goddess,
That with one view sees all the world, b ••• witness to it
Gods! must they then depart with little thoughts of me?
What if they should? why should that fear disturb thee?
'Tis a precarious gre •• ess that depends
On others thought • my own sustain my excellence
Why dost thou with then with such eagerness
To have these Grecians in thy eye once more!
What means this strange disquiet, and the fire
Of this so wild, untractable desire?
The end of the First Act
ACT II
Iphigenia. Euphrosine
Iph
HOw strangely she seem'd mov'd in the Relation
Euph
But how differently?
Now quite transported with th' Heroick Action
Iph
Then at their Victory as much 〈...〉
And at their usage of her mortify'd
Euph
But pleas'd
Iph
Yet in the midst of joy disdaining to be pleas'd
Euph
Sollicitous about th' event,
Impatient till 'tis known
Iph
So uncommanding of herself
Till now I ne're observ'd her
Euph
Shou'd but her Scythians intercept the Grecians
You'll find her show a passion still more impotent
A distant shout
Iph
What dost thou mean? 'tis what her Soul desires
But the hoarse eccho of that distant shout
Tells us that we too long defer obedience
To what she now commanded, that while she
Her private Offerings paid to Great Diana,
We should advance toward the Cliffs dreadful brow,
From which the fearful downfal of the Precipice,
And the wild Horrors of the Rocky Beach
Lye subject to our view; from thence she thinks
We something may descry
But ah! see there, see where the noble Strangers,
Prostrate and groveling on the stormy Beach,
Surrounded lye on ev'ry side by Fate
The murdring Scythian shouting on the one side,
And the mad Euxin bellowing on the other,
And blanching with its flying foam their garments
And now the savage croud all pours upon them
Shout at distance
And now they send up barbarous shouts to Heav'n
Alas, they'll murder them; turn, turn Euphrosine,
My Soul this cruel prospect cannot bear
Euph
They dare not touch them, for perhaps the Queen,
The Queen can less endure this sight than you
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
Tho 〈...〉 her with a mind
Above 〈...〉 her Se • ,
Still as a woman, she 〈...〉 to Love,
Yet Love she 〈...〉 hour ▪
For you still 〈...〉 Soul
So much of Grecian 〈...〉 , and Grecian virtue,
That she has utterly contemn'd her Scythians
All you have said these notte youths make good,
These 〈...〉 objects worthy her
That 〈...〉 held, and at the sight
Her 〈...〉 Soul took speedy fire ▪
Iph
〈...〉 : •• meet Imagination all
Euph
〈...〉 were •• much concern'd to observe her nicely,
Else had you plainly seen her words, her gestures,
Her mien, her eyes, and all her soul declare it
Shout aloud
Iph
But hark?
Whence the rude noise of this audacious shout,
So near this hallow'd place?
Enter Scythian
Scyth
Where is the Queen?
Iph
What would'st thou have? the Queen is in a place
Where for thy life thou must not dare t • approach
Scyth
Of the four Grecians two are now her Captives,
And with slow solemn march are guarded towards the Temple
Iph
What have I heard?
Euph
What are they?
Scyth
Grecians, we know no more
Euph
Then heard you not their names?
Scith
Their names by strictest Oaths they enjoyn'd each other
Not to pronounce
Euph
What numbers of you took them?
Scyth
We took them not by advantage of our numbers,
But by the powerful influence of our Goddess,
Thrice had we now without success attack'd them,
From supernatural aid they drew their safety
Oft Castor and his Brother they invok'd,
And some affirm these two Auxilia • Gods
Apparently sustain'd them
Our Scythians now from neighbouring Rocks came 〈...〉
And we a fresh and fourth attach prepar'd ▪
The Grecians, the two friendly Gods involk'd,
Th' avenging pow'r of Great Diana we,
That in the Clouds inthron'd with Silver Glory,
Illustrated the Horrors of the Combat
When of the Grecians, one, to our astonishment,
Starting from out the rest in fearful manner,
Fix'd on the empty Air his staring eyes,
He shook his Temples, and his Teeth he g • ash'd,
And then he fetch'd a groan that seem'd to rend
His vital Thread asunder; then like a • yon
He formidably roar'd, Dost thou not see ▪
Dost thou not see th abominable Fiend
Dost thou not see th' inexorable Fury?
Look how her bloody mouth spouts purple foam,
And her black Nostrils, cataracts of Fire!
Gods! how her cruel eyes shoot horrors thro my Soul ▪
Save me, y' eternal pow'rs, for see she comes,
The dreadful Goddess comes, and now she raves,
And now her hissing curling Snakes erect
Their coal black Crests, and dart their forky Tongue ▪
Do you see their odious eyes? I cannot bear them
Damnation! how their fiery glances sting me!
But oh what shape, what dismal shape is that,
That staring wide with stony eyes behind them,
Appears more dreadful than ten thousand furies!
Oh 'tis my—
Euph
What follow'd?
Scyth
The rest with hollow dying sounds,
Imperfectly pronouncing
He foam'd, he inward rowl'd his ghastly eyes,
And groaning, down he fell entranc'd before us
Iph
Poor wretched man! how influenc'd this the rest?
Scyth
While with astonishment all eyes were fix'd
On such a dreadful, such a wondrous object;
Two of them took the advantage of the occasion,
And sliding in between the craggy Piles
Of numerous Rocks invironing the Bay,
Were quickly in their winding mazes lost
Euph
What did the fourth in consequence of him?
Scyth
He, neither fled nor fought, nor yet submitted,
Anothers danger took up all his Soul,
Regardless of his own ▪
For now th' entranc'd beginning to 〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉 their deadly 〈...〉 ;
〈...〉
〈...〉 the 〈...〉 wretch,
And made 〈...〉 of his Friend
Euph
〈...〉 eternal •• me
Iph
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉 even 〈...〉 hearts ▪
Scyth
〈...〉 but ravish them ▪
The God like deed with general shout applauding,
Down we unanimously thr •• our Javelins,
And the contention the remain'd,
Was who should save the Grecians
Running, we gently rear'd them from the ground,
And cherish'd him who wanted most our help;
Till quickly we recall'd his fleeting Spirit
Then into different Bands we all dividing,
Some ran among the Rocks to seek the Flyers,
And to the Temple some conduct the Captives
But see they now draw near
Iph
Euphrosine, inform the Queen of this,
While I receive the Grecians
Euph
Be wise, and come away
Why would you see a sight that would distract you?
Iph
I would to Heaven it would, for that distraction
Would drown a world of woe in sweet forgetfulness;
'Tis better surely not to know, than knowing,
To know that we are infinitely miserable
But if I cannot bear these objects here,
How shall I then endure them at the Altar?
How shall I there approach them? how shall I there—
Let me not think of it, that thought has Daggers in it
Euph
Be wise, and come away
Iph
These noble youths bring news from Greece, Euphrosine
'Tis now five years since I beheld a Grecian;
Oh how I long to hear from my dear Country
Besides, consider what I left in Greece
I left a Father there
Euph
A cruel one
Iph
Let him be cruel, still I am his Daughter;
I left a Mother there, she was not cruel
Her very eyes were not so dear as I to her
I owe my very life, I owe my all,
To her exceeding Tenderness!
There too I left the darling of my Soul,
The darling of my Virgin Soul, a Brother,
On whose young Temples scarce the seventh Summer
Had shed its golden Down
Can I be thought to have left all these behind,
And to have left them all behind entirely?
Ah no! Their Images are here, Euph • osi • e;
And here remind me of the dear Originals,
Incessantly remind me
There are no other objects here of tenderness
Or none, excepting thee
And I, thou know'st am in my nature soft
Then to indulge that softness strait retire,
And leave me here, to ask these noble youths
After my Country and my dear Relations
Ex. Euph
Enter Orestes. Pilades. Guard
Approach ye most unfortunate of men!
Ill-fated youths, the Sons of wretched Parents!
Wretched your Brothers, and your Sisters miserable!
Or
Madam, we know we are your Victims,
And come resolv'd to dye
For Souls undaunted; why this vain compassion?
By you we bleed, and you deplore our destiny,
If that you think by softning our firm minds
To make death dreadful to us, you mistake us
To Souls prepar'd, such little arts are vain;
Not all your Scythian Javelins once could daunt us,
Nor can your Female Lamentations melt us
Your cruel Gods, when we approach their Altars
Shall blush, to see two men, two dying men
Unshaken and undaunted as themselves,
Amidst their high security
Iph
So high a mind in such a low condition!
But from whence are you miserable men!
How long have ye been wanderers from your Country!
A long, long time 'twill be, e're you return to it
Or
Seek not to soften us by vain inquiries,
Nor to disturb us in our hour of Death
Iph
Grecians! you are I see, but of what Province?
I must be answer'd; my reasons are most urgent
Or
How should our answers possibly concern you?
Iph
Are you Brothers?
Or
We are not so near as Brothers, and yet nearer
Iph
Then you are Friends it seems
What may we call you?
Or
Miserable!
Iph
That is the name which Fortune has bestow'd upon you
I ask not after that
Or
The mo • e we keep our names conceal'd
The more we keep this shameful Fate conceal'd!
This Fate so much unworthy of us
Tho our Hearts bleed, our Names shall never suffer
Iph
Say then, what State, what City gave you Birth?
Or
Madam, we came resolv'd to dye;
And Death is now our business!
Iph
There's time enough, alas, for Death,
And long you will enjoy him
Answer me first; oblige me so far, Grecian
Or
Argos, renown'd throughout the World's my Country
Iph
Ha! Argos! Is it possible? O Heav'ns!
Tell me the truth, I here conjure thee, Grecian
Or
Within Mycaenaes Walls I first saw light,
Mycaenae, once the Towring Queen of Cities
Iph
And yet you left it for this dismal place
Or
Ev'n so the gods would have it
Iph
They're welcome Guests to me who come from Argos
Or
And Death's the hearty welcome we expect
Iph
Grecian, you may inform me of some things,
Which most my impatient Soul desires to know
Or
You will be answer'd, speak
Iph
You have heard of Troy, whose Fame has fill'd the Universe?
Or
Oh, would to Jove I ne're had heard of Troy,
Not in my very Dreams!
Iph
'Tis said it now by Fate of War lies low
Or
But oh severely have its Heav'nly Founders
Upon its Conquerors reveng'd its fall
Iph
Is Hellen at the last return'd?
Or
As fatally to some of mine,
As ever she departed
Iph
She once had like t' have fatal prov'd to me too!
Or
My obligations to her are well known
Iph
The common hatred of all Grecians she
Say, are those Grecians yet come back?
Is Calchas yet return'd?
Or
The lying Prophet perish'd on th' Aegean
Iph
And Ulysses?
Or
A wanderer upon Earth and Sea,
The outcast of the world ▪
Iph
At length then halting vengeance has o'retaken them
And proud Achilles! lives he?
Or
In Fields, where once Troy stood, his Head lies low,
And he in vain at Aulis was contracted
To wretched Iphigenia
Iph
False fatal Marriage!
The fraud of Calchas, and of dire Ulysses!
aside. But run there any Rumours now in Greece,
aside
Touching the Fate of that unhappy Princess?
Or
She who was sacrific'd at Aul •• ?
Iph
She
Or
Alas!
They talk of her as of a pleasing vision
Sent down from Heav'n to chear our eyes a moment,
And then to Re-ascend
But, Madam, who are you, who here enquire
Thus circumstantially of Grecian matters?
Iph
I too was born in Greece, and young was torn from it
Should I proceed, my story is so strange,
That it could ne're find credit with you
How bears the General his high Felicity?
Or
What General? I am grown an utter stranger,
Ev'n to the very names of all the happy
Iph
The King of Kings, Imperial Ag • memnon
Or
I cannot, will not speak, enquire no further
Iph
Now by the Gods proceed, I here conjure you
'Tis a long time since last my Soul knew comfort
Or
The King of Kings, is now but common clay
Iph
Then are his Children wretched; say, how died he?
Or
Most miserably, for himself and others?
Iph
Alas! but, how?
Or
As Troy and Priam tumbled from their height,
As all the Race of Tantalus has faln,
So perish'd Agamemnon by a Woman
Iph
A wretched creature sure, whoe're she be
Or
She weeps, by Heav'n; from whence these flowing tears?
Iph
I mourn, reflecting on his former happiness,
I mourn the sad vicissitudes of Fate,
The ills that every hour befal Mortality,
The common sad condition of poor man ▪
My own • orlorn estate. How bears the Queen?—
Or
Hold ▪ by the Gods I here conjure you hold,
By vain enquiry plague my Soul no more
Iph
Answer this once, and I have done for ever
How bears the Queen this terrible disaster
Or
The Queen still met a more Tremendous Destiny
Iph
Dissolve me Gods into a •• ood of Tears
aside: How fell she?
aside
Or
Alas, 'tis terrible, it shakes my Nature ▪
She fell by—
Iph
Whom?
Or
By the curst wretch to whom she gave his Being
Iph
By her own Son? Astonishment of woe!
Wherefore?
Or
His Royal Father he reveng'd,
Whom barbarously she murder'd
Iph
Murder'd!
O Horror upon Horror! Dismal Race,
The true Descent of T •• sal •• !
Deplorable the Crime, and dire the Vengeance!
Or
And direly have the Gods repaid him
Iph
〈◊〉 he now 〈◊〉 Arges?
Or
Everywhere, and no where
〈◊〉 Euph • osine ▪ Iphigenia goes to her
Euph
Madam, the Queen approaches
Or
Hast thou observ'd that Lady well, my Friend,
That's so acquainted with th' affairs of Greece?
Pil
I have
Or
Methink • there's much of Hellen in her form
Pil
I was about t' inform you that I thought so
Or
That very Air that set the world on fire
Pil
As sweet, yet check'd by something that's severe
And see the very motion of that eye,
That went to all beholders Hearts like Lightning,
That moves ev'n mine in this my lost condition
aside,
Or
She is not only fair, my friend, she is good too,
She pities our misfortunes, nay, she weeps for them
Pil
Pity's the Harbinger of Love, suppose
That this should be the object which the god
Foretold should be oblig'd by Love to assist us?
Or
I would to Heaven it were! O hopeless wish ▪
For at the sight of her my Soul dilates itself,
As at the view of a long absent Friend,
Unsatiated with gazing
Enter Queen. Guard
Queen
At length our Scythians have redeem'd their Honour,
And haughty Strangers you are in our pow'r
But to you, Grecian, we have obligations,
Which we disdain to owe
Guards, let him instantly be free; for th' other
Strait to the Temple let him be conducted,
And there expire the Victim of the Goddess
Or
The very mercy of a Scythians cruelty;
I gave you Life and Liberty, because
I thought them grateful gifts, but Death's the present,
The only present you can make to me
Would you requite the gifts which I bestow'd on you,
With my Friends Life and Liberty requite them,
And let my Blood appease your cruel Goddess
Queen
Proud! Hast thou then disdain'd my proffer'd mercy?
Know one of you is doom'd to die, and instantly
Determine which between you
Pil
Scythians, conduct your Prisoner
They are going
Or
Hold, you Barbarians, hold
By all that wondrous pow'r of Sacred Friendship,
That but this moment charm'd your savage heart,
I here conjure you, hold!
Consider how we from our earliest years
To Pilades
Have liv'd, as if one will, one soul had acted us;
Is this a time to differ? why wouldst thou
Usurp this wretched Death, that is my Right?
Who drew thee from the Clime of gentle Greece,
To this inhumane shore?
What but my miseries seduc'd thee hither!
The pomp and the support of my sad state?
What have I done t' induce you to believe
That I should proveso recreant to all goodness,
To let you suffer here instead of me?
Pil
Would you not have me suffer?
Or
Would I not have thee suffer? canst thou ask it?
O my Friend!
Pil
And yet you urge me to survive you,
O contradiction!
Or
What hast thou done, which can deserve the death,
Which fondly thus thou court'st?
Pil
What have I done that I deserve to live
After the only man of all the world
That's fit to be my Friend?
Or
Thou hast no loss in me, or if thou had'st
Thou hast a Soul that is above thy Fortune,
Oh live my Friend, and shew this cursed Race
What Grecians can endure!
Pil
What live to see you here expire
Before my very Face!
Live and stand tamely by, while these Barbarians
Sheath their accursed Knives in your Hearts blood
Away, I always own'd my selfa man,
And own no Virtue of that barbarous nature!
Or
What will become of me?
If 'tis so hard to thee to lose thy Friend,
To thee whose faculties are all entire,
Whose Soul's in its full strength,
What must it be to me, who bow my neck
Beneath the Burthen which the Gods have laid on me?
Whose wounded spirit swoons beneath the pangs
Of sorrow, which no Tongue of man can utter
O cursed sting of guilt that's insupportable!
Pil
Thou hast no guilt, the Gods themselves declar'd it
Or
Oh I have done a deed!
Pil
The Gods commanded thee
Or
Nature forbid me
Pil
N ••• re is theirs, and theirs are all her Laws,
What their supream Authority has made,
Their independant pow'r can supersede
Thou could'st not help performing their commands,
For what they will, is fate
Or
Then why at my last need have they forsaken me,
Why has the baser world disown'd this Fact,
And branded my great name with infamy?
Why gapes the Earth with ghastly yawns before me,
While Hell unwilling from the Center bursts,
To shew me forms that fright my trembling Genius,
Blast all my Faculties, unhinge my Reason,
And in a moment make me start to madness?
Yet while I had thee by me 't was impossible
That I could be intirely miserable,
It was impossible that I could think
Upon thy wondrous Faith, thy wondrous Truth,
Upon thy wondrous Self, and not be pleas'd
That thought, that only thought prevail'd upon me
To bear the smarting wounds of my own Spirit,
To bear the loss of Peace, the loss of Fame
But must I lose my Friend, and must I bear it?
Ye Gods I will not bear it; and my plagues
Shall be your aspect no longer. Come ye Furies ▪
Ye formidable Goddesses ascend,
And threefold madness to befriend me seize me
Pil
What shall I do?
His fury wildly champs upon the Curb,
Anon it foams, and starting with a Bound,
Hurries him headlong, far from Reasons Road;
I shake, I tremble at the dismal consequence;
I can no longer bear this mortal Agony
In him whom dearer than my self I love
No more!
Compose the Tumult in thy Raging Spirits,
Thy friend has listen'd to thy Lamentation,
And with a bleeding heart has heard
Thy miserable plea
Or
Is it not fitting then that I should bleed?
Pil
Grant me but one Request, and thou shalt die
Or
'Tis thine, whate're it be
Pil
But swear
Or
Then by th' Almighty pow'r of our Jove,
By all our great Progenitors, his Off-spring,
I swear!
Pil
That thou wilt die as thou hast liv'd,
My Friend and my Companion
Or
Couldst thou doubt that? How willingly I swear!
Pil
Then hast thou sworn that I shall not survive thee
Or
Nay, that my last Request.—
Pil
Hold, by the Gods, to whom thou standst oblig'd
By dreadful Oaths; hold, make not that request,
And be not perjur'd in the hour of Death
Or
Ha!
Now Death is arm'd, and with a fearful Sting ▪
Queen
Now, Grecians, who's the Victim?
Or
'Tis I
Pil
'Tis I
Or
Pil. 'Tis both
Queen
But both it must not be, I here am absolute,
But one shall fall a Victim to the Goddess
Pil
To holy Friendship t'other falls a sacrifice
Queen aside
These are, ye Gods, the works of your own hands,
Your living Image
To separate Apartments Guards conduct them
Exeunt Guards, with Orestes and Pilades
Now to the Temple lead, let's there consult
The Goddess, she herself shall choose her Victim
Exeunt Queen and Attendants. Manet Iphigenia, Euph
Iph
Stay, my Euphrosine, one moment stay,
Hast thou observ'd that Godlike Youth,
Who shew'd that noble sorrow?
Euph
I have
Iph
Does he deserve the Death which we prepare for him?
Does he not, say, Deserve to be Immortal?
Euph
Yet he must die
Iph
Dye Nature first; he must not Dye, Euphrosine
Euph
Yes, in the Arms of a young Beauteous Queen
Iph
Ha!
First let him bleed; no ▪ let him live, ye pow'rs,
Let Iphigemia Die
Euph
Amazement? What do I hear?
Iph
What wilt thou say when thou hast heard the rest
Euph
The rest, oh Heav'ns!
Iph
To my Apartment instantly let's go,
There thou the secret of my Soul shalt know,
But not the very Winds of Heav'n must on it blow
The end of the Second Act
ACT III
Iphigenia, Euphrosine
Iph
WIlt thou betray me?
Euph
I'll rather dye with you
Iph
Disswade me then no more; I am determin'd,
And Fate crys out I must not lose a moment
Be gone then, fly, and send the unhappy Grecian to me
Enter Delia
Del
Madam, the Queen commands that both the strangers
Without delay be brought into her presence
Iph
Unfortunate command that thus prevents me!
I will not be prevented; inspire me thou,
Thou gentle God of Love, for whom I act
Delia, inform the Queen, that of the Captives ▪
The eldest is the Victim now
Of these most dreadful Altars,
For such, she says, is great Diana 's Will
His Eyes are muffled, and his Arms are pinion'd;
His Temples are with Holy Fillets bound,
Already has the sacred water cleans'd him,
And to the infernal Gods he stands devoted
The other shall attend her instantly
Exit Delia ▪
Euphrosine!
To me convey the eldest of the strangers,
And to the cruel Queen dispatch the other
And thou, Immortal Love, whose conqu'ring pow'r
Can give the Tender Timerous Virgin force,
Thus to defie the Terrors of the night
Immortal Love indulge my bold design;
Preserve us, thou preserver of the Universe!
Enter Orestes
Or
Here all alone! That pleases me: But why,
Why I can gaze upon her unobserv'd,
And none condemn my weakness
I have not half an hour to view the light;
And since I've felt the extremity of woe,
'Tis fit I find some pleasure e're I dye
Death's ghastly Image then I'll chace away
With Love's Transporting Thoughts
But if those Thoughts once make me fond of Life,
I'll think that I have reason to despair,
And so contented dye
Coming up to Iph •
It was your pleasure that a dying wretch
Should come and take his leave of you
Iph
Stranger, I sent for you to give you notice
That th' Altar is adorn'd, the Steel prepar'd,
And the next moment they expect the Victim
Or
The Victim will attend them
But whose must be the executing arm?
Iph
Look how it Trembles at the Dreadful Deed!
Methinks with Horror, Stranger, you survey me
Or
No, do but strike with that soft melting look,
And my last breath shall Blessing pour my Soul on thee
O Look, ill suited to this cursed office,
That nought respires but Blood and horrid Murther
How long have you possess'd it?
Iph
Last night the Scythians, threatning horrid Tortures,
Compell'd me to accept of it;
But a more cruel wrack succeeds th' acceptance
The fear of striking this accursed blow
Has torn my heartin pieces
Or
What object makes you start, and turn so pale?
Iph
I sark! heard you not the Temple doors
Upon their hinges turning!
Or
No, Twas the hollow Breath of the Black North,
That grumbles on the Mountain ▪
Iph
My Apprehension every Moment murders me;
Ah Gods! we must make ha ••• , the fatal Time draws nigh
Or
Yet something wou'd I whisper to your Soul,
Wou'd you vouchsafe to hear me ▪
Iph
Alas 'tis now too late, we must be gone
Or
To Death, at your Command ▪ this readily I run
Going towards the Temple
Iph
Ah Gods!
You run you know not whither; that's not the way
Suppose that • ow some pitying God persuades me
Yet to preserve you from impending Fate
Or
And my Friend too!
Iph
And him too
Or
To that propitious God my very self I'll sacrifice
Iph
Wou'd you take me the Partner of your Flight?
Or
The Partner! What a Whirl of Fate is here!
Surprize and Joy distract me
Iph
Wou'd you?
Or
Or may I perish in it unlamented
Iph
No more. Near yonder Western Point there lies
A leaky, Tempest-beaten, tatter'd Bark;
In which Four Wretches slumber out the Night,
To fit them for the Labours of the Day;
That we must seize on, and must trust to that
Or
Alas, we need not: Near you Eastern Point
The S • out, the Strong-ribb'd Argosic attends us
A hundred daring Souls inclos'd in its huge Bulk,
All waiting on my Nod
Iph
Were you not wreck'd then?
Or
Among the Rocks the Vestel rides conceal'd
Iph
What do I hear! nay then, the Gods regard us
Remove a little further to the Right,
That no one from the Temple may discern you
Thither I must return, and thence transport
The Image of the Goddess,
Or
That in my Rapture I had quite forgot
Aside
Iph
So shall we still be under her Protection,
And shall avoid the fierceness of her Anger
Or
Alas! You've nam'd the very fatal Thing
For which we touch'd on this accursed Shore
Iph
Then came you here by choice?
Or
To fetch this fatal Image of the Goddess
Iph
What mov'd you to it?
Or
The Delphick God ordain'd it
Iph
Ha!
How every thing I hear gives me new Life,
And makes my Blood run dancing to my Heart!
Six Grecian Virgins, all of Noble Birth,
Within yon Temple wait upon my Call,
Who all wou'd offer up their Lives to serve me
They tell me of prodigious Apparitions
That have astonish'd them this fatal Night
Two shall amuse the Queen with the Relation,
While the rest secretly transport the Goddess
And thou, old Night, the Friend to Love and Stealth,
T' indulge this Stealth to which great Love compels me,
Redouble all thy Shades
Aside
Ex • ect me in a Moment back again;
But on your Life re move not from the place;
Let me be sure to find you here;
So may you find the Happiness you wish for
Exit Iph
Or
Confirm that Wish, ye Heavens!
Heark! Who comes there! A Man! Pray Heav'n a Friend!
What Alteration can a Moment make!
I, who this Minute long'd to lay my Head
Down in the dark and peaceful Grave,
Am now grown fond of miserable Life
What sudden Vigour Love receives from Hope!
For scarce an Hour is past since the soft God
Lay weak and languishing within my Breast;
Now raging there' he all his Pow'r exerts
Enter Pilades
Now Fate beware a Counter-turn!
Who comes here?
Pil
A Friend
Or
My Pilades!
Pil
The same
Or
Speak lower
Pil
I cannot speak too loud, who bring thee Safety
Or
Softly, I say: you know not what you do,
Nor to what Danger you expose us both
Pil
The fear of Danger to the Winds deliver
I bring thee Life, and Health, and Joy, my Friend
The Scythian Queen has sent all these by me;
Yet on Conditions sent them
But thou art cold, 〈◊〉 if thou fear'dst the Terms
Know, the Conditions will transport Orestes
The Queen inclines to make another Choice
Of Victims for the Altar; but declares,
That Custom, which is Scythian Law, requires,
That all those Strangers, whom the Sovereign Rulers
By their Supream Prerogative preserve,
Must become Scythians, by espousing Scythians;
Born so, or grown so here by long continuance
Or, by attending on those cruel Altars,
Appease the wrathful Goddess
Or
Proceed
Pil
The Mistress she design'd for me the nam'd
The Name of yours she omitted; but she added,
That both our Lives and Happiness depend ••
Upon your swift Compliance
I, as your Friend, engage you shou'd comply
Or
Why did you so?
Pil
Because I found by what she said,
And what she did not say,
Her lovely Self's the Person she designs for thee!
Or
No matter
Without my Knowledge, why shou'd you engage?
Pil
Why?
Because I thought in this impending Danger
You were in Reason bound, for your own sake,
To make my Engagement good
Or
For my own sake! I'll perish • ere comply
Pil
Then, as a Friend, I frankly must inform you,
You stand oblig'd to make it good for mine
Or
A meer imaginary Obligation?
Pil
Imaginary? Will you force me then
T' upbraid you? What wou'd I have done for you?
Or
You wou'd have died: and I wou'd bleed for Pilades
Pil
Dissembler
Or
How!
Pil
You talk of dying, and refuse me what's so very easie?
Or
Is then the doing a base thing so easie?
Pil
Where is the Baseness in espousing her?
Or
Where is the Justice in espousing one,
Whom I can never love?
Pil
Come, come, your Friend is the unhappy Person
Whom you cou'd never love
Or
And yet you see I bear his bitterest Censures
Pil
Why can you never love her?
From whence proceeds the Aversion?
Or
Aversion I have none; for I esteem her
Nay, I admire her
Pil
Marry her then, and Love will soon succeed
Or
Urge me no more
Pil
For your own sake, as well as mine, I must
Or
Have but a little Patience
Pil
Were but my Life at Stake, I wou'd have Patience
But what I vaine more, much more than Life,
My Love is lost, unless my Friend complies
Or
Your Love? What Love?
Pil
I told you that the Queen declar'd the Name
Of her whom she design'd for me
Or
And do you love her?
Pil
•••• er than Life, or what's more dear, than Peace;
Unless she brings it to this wretched Breast
Or
When cou'd you see her?
Pil
At our Arrival
Or
Ha! Where?
Pil
Just on this very spot
Or
Ha! on this Spot! saw whom! Gods, how I tremble!
Pil
The Priestess, tho' I ne'er approach'd the Altar,
Has with her pointed Weapon reach'd my Heart
Or
Damnation! wonderful accursed Accident!
Now Fate prepares her Counter-turn. You amaze me!
Was that a time for Love to make Impressions?
Pil
The force of Destiny wou'd surely have it so
And great Apollo 's Oracle encourag'd me
But yet the Thought of your approaching Danger,
At first restrain'd the growing Fire within me
But when the Queen insur'd your precious Life,
And gave me charming Hope,
She blew it into such a Flame,
I must possess or die
Or
How will relentless Heav'n dispose of me!
Aside
Pil
By that dear Love, an • all my Hope of Happiness,
Which lies in you, your faithful Friend entreats you
Or
I'll hear no more, you know not what you ask
Pil
That you would do your Duty, that I ask
Or
I am not to be taught my Duty here
Pil
Let it appear;
Was ever Man deceiv'd as I have been?
Or
You deceive your self
Pil
I is one indeed deceives me,
Whom I have long mistaken for my self,
Unjust Orestes!
Is not the Altar Deck'd, the Steel prepar'd
To rip this Breast that has so long receiv'd you,
And cherish'd you more dearly than my • lood
Than my Hearts Blood which I'm about to lose
Or
You shall not lose a Drop
Pil
Comply then, and prevent it instantly ▪
What can Orestes with such ease prevent it?
With so much safety too, with somuch Honour?
And yet Deliberate? Where is the Friend?
Where is the Celebrated Friend of Pilades?
But see their Priestesses advancing towards us,
Sent doubtlesly t'explore our R •• olutio • ;
Can you Resolve to see this Fait ••• l Breast
Rip'd up before your Eyes
Or
Come I'll secure y ••• li •• !
Pil
Will you?
Or
I will by Heaven?
Pil
And when?
Or
This very Moment
Enter two Priestesses cross the Stage, with the Image Delia following them
Pil
Then art thou yet my Friend
Del
Grecian, the Image is convey'd before
Your Friends will follow strait, prepare t'attend them
To Or
Or
I am prepar'd (to Pil. ) observe you that Procession?
Ex. Del
Pil
What means that Image, and that nightly Progress?
Or
Behold it well!
That very fatal Image great Apollo
Ordained us to transport
Pil
And whither do these Priestesses remove it?
Or
Where we without the least delay must follow;
Come, Come along; we must embark this Moment
Pil
By Heaven my Head turns round, Is this a Miracle,
Or have you palpably design'd t'abuse me?
Or
Thou hast heard a wonderous Truth!
Pil
What God has wrought that wonder?
Or
Time's wanting now to tell thee
Pil
How basely I have censur'd thee!
Canst thou forgive me? 'Tis my last request to thee
Or
Come, Thou art still my best, my only Friend
Come, follow, by the glimmering of the Moon,
I see our friends are coming
Pil
Our friends! Astonishment! What friends do you mean?
I'm more and more confounded
Or
Come on
Pil
Farewel
Or
What can my Pilades design? Come on I say
Pil
Never
Or
Canst thou Desert me?
Pil
The great design for which I came is executed,
I've done my Duty, and behold you Happy
Your wretched Friend must never see you more
Or
Why do'st thou talk so?
Pil
My Life and Happiness are both confin'd,
To this accursed Climate
Or
The Priestess of Diana you will follow
Pil
Till my last groan sets fre • • y afflicted Soul
Enter 〈◊〉
Euph
Grecian, the Image is convey'd before us,
Prepare to follow
to Or
Yonder the Priestess of Diana comes,
Th' Associate of your flight. I go before,
Exit
Pil
What have I heard? Damnation!
It must be illusion and enchantment al •
By all that's good her self, her Lovely self
That slowly advancing seems to give directions
To some who are about her
And for this reason you refus'd complyance
To what the Queen Demanded?
Or
This was the very Reason?
Pil
You Love this Priestess of Diana then?
Or
Thou art my self, my very self, my Pilades
View thy own Heart and see Orestes there
Pil
A long and last farewel
Or
Wilt thou betray me?
Pil
Unkind t'insult thus o'er your dying Friend
Or
To die is to Betray me!
Nay dying you Betray both me and her
She, she is in Distress, and wants your Help,
To free her from this Barbarous clime,
And this more Barbarous Office
Can you affirm you love, and yet forsake her
In this extream necessity?
Pil
Can I affirm I Love, and yet behold her
within anothers Arms?
Or
Who shall possess her lies in fate conceal'd
She has not yet 〈...〉
Come, the Time 〈...〉
Our generous 〈...〉
Come let it 〈...〉
The sordid •• Wretch that breaths, can die for Love,
'Tis a soft, 〈...〉
Great Natures 〈...〉
The Gods as many Lovers make •• M • n
But they scarce make two 〈...〉 Ages
Of all the Race of Living Men
Fame celebrates us Two 〈...〉 Friendship,
And shall a Woman •• eak the Noble Bond?
Pil
Why? 〈...〉
Or
〈...〉 ? Would you then against her will possess her?
Pil
〈...〉 die, 〈◊〉 , rather •• contented
To drag on life 〈...〉 ,
And be my self a wretch most miserable,
Than render her unhappy
Or
'Tis spoken like a true and generous Lover,
Wilt thou not shew thy self a generous Friend,
My Pilades, and judge my Thoughts by thine,
Vast is the watry Plain that we must plough,
E're we discharge our sacred Load at Athens;
And we must labour all the Dismal way
With many Difficulties, mighty Dangers
Those let thy Love and Virtue make thy Friends,
Attend her, Help her, Save her, court her, gain her,
Incline her Heart, and I'll release my claim
Pil
What shall I answer? Love and Shame Distract me;
Must He surpass me thus in Godlike proofs
Of unexampled Faith? He must not, shall not,
Tho' he has surely prepossest her Soul
I will not make my self so little to my self;
Aside
No, I'll live rather greatly miserable,
That with my self I may contented die
Thou hast o'ercome, Orestes,
And Noble Friendship has prevail'd o'er Love
But oh my Friend, if on these cursed Altars
I had spilt the Blood that's next my Heart to save thee,
It had been an easier Sacrifice
Enter Iph
Or
No more, she comes
Iph
Who's that? The Stranger?
Or
The same
Iph
Is that your Friend?
Or
It is
Iph
Let us away,
Now all our Interruptions are remov'd;
For I pretending Orders from the Queen,
Have from their Posts, remov'd the Neighbouring Sentry's
But whither? Thro' what Dangers am I running?
Look not my Soul, Oh, look not now before thee!
My Head grows giddy with th' amazing prospect
Look backward then, survey the dreadful Altar;
I do, I see, I see the Bloody Knife there;
Ah Gods! I feel it, with its cruel point;
It Goads and Stabs me forward, Let's begone;
I can no longer bear the Murdring thought
As they are going out, they are met by a party of Scythi ans, bringing back the four Priestesses, and the Image
Iph
Ah!
Scyth
Here, Here are their Accomplices, fall on
Or
Hold Savages, O Hold
Pil
Forbear, Forbear
Or
As for us two, we yield our selves your Captives,
Touch not with Impious Hands her Sacred Limbs
Scyth
I had forgot, she is Dianas Priestess,
Keep off your Hands, but guard her with your Eyes
So;
Be it your Care the Prisoners to confine,
I'll to the Queen Relate their black Design
Exit
Iph
Ah wretched Men! by cruel God's betray'd
Pil
Pity thy self alas too lovely Maid
Or
Death soon will put an end to all our woe,
But Oh what pangs art thou to undergoe,
Who art condemn'd to stike th' Inhuman Blow
The End of the Third Act
ACT IV
Enter Queen, and Scythian
Queen
WHat have I heard! Arm'd Men upon the Breach!
Scyth
Above an hundred, all with Grecian Plumes,
And Grecian Shields
Queen
Double the Guards around the Temple,
And strongly guard the Passes
Who saw these Grecians?
Scyth
As we expecting lay for your Return,
Upon the Summe • of yon shagg • e Mountain,
That bending its black Brow, with dreadful Scowl,
Over the gloomy Deep, affrights great Neptune,
By the pale Moon's reflected Beams we spied them
And on the sight, dismounting all my Men,
I brought them to defend your sacred Person
Queen
And so, upon your March at this dead Season,
You took these Grecian Fugitives: 'Tis well;
You have done important Service, and I thank you
But what's the Reason that the younger Captive
Is not already in my Presence?
My severe Charge how dare they disobey?
Scyth
Behold, dread Queen, he comes
Queen
Then go and see my other Orders executed
Ex. Scyth
Enter Pilades
Whom wou'd not that Majestick Mien deceive?
And his Friend's God-like Eyes that look Divinity?
Why shou'd the Sacred Character of Virtue
Shine on a Villain's Countenance? Ye Pow'rs!
Why fix'd ye not a Brand on Treason's Front,
That we might know t' avoid perfidious Mortals?
Aside
Look if the Traytor once vouchsafes to blush!
To him
If still his Countenance be not assur'd!
His Eyes Commanding, and his Aspect Lordly!
How do'st thou dare, with that audacious Look,
T' affront offended Majesty?
Pil
I know no Mortal whom I ought to fear
Queen
An Hypocrite, and not afraid!
What makes Hypocrisie so very odious?
Unless because 'tis Cowardice
Pil
Know, Queen, I scorn Hypocrisie, and know
The basest of Hypocrisies is Slander
Queen
And am I then defi'd, presumptuous Grecian,
And dar'd to prove my Charge?
Pil
I dare ev'n Jove, who knows all Hearts, to pro •••• t
Queen
Then, past Reply thou soon shalt stand convicted
When I in Mercy gave you Life and Liberty,
Did you not own your self oblig'd?
Pil
I own it
Queen
But when Diana 's Priestess I bestow'd on you,
Did not you seem transported? Answer me
Was not your Joy extravagant and loud?
Did you not swear, that I, of all the World,
Was she who nearest had oblig'd your Soul?
Pil
I said it, and I thought it
Pil
Did you not promise to reside in Scythia?
And to engage your Friend to do the like?
That with the Service of your Life you might
Return me, Thanks for the rich Present made you?
Were not these very Words your own?
Pil
They were
Queen
Then think of thy base Flight, if thou dar'st think of it,
And say, thou art not a Hypocrite
What canst thou answer to thy just Accuser?
Pil
That which will make my Accuser say, she wrongs me
You accuse me that I wou'd have fled: Indeed
I attempted to regain that Liberty,
Of which your Pow'r unjustly had depriv'd me
What Reason cou'd you find, insulting Queen,
To make them Captives whom the Gods made free,
And gave them Souls deserving Liberty?
As against Nature's Laws we are your Victims,
Against the Right of Nations we're your Captives;
And any way was lawful to fair Liberty,
Which we were born for, and for which we'll die
Queen
That very Moment I restor'd your Liberty
Pil
Indeed you did restore it, but on Terms
Impossible to be perform'd by us
Queen
Why did you then approve them?
Phel
I never knew them well till I had left you
Queen
A meer Pretence! Is Grecian Faith so known?
Had not you giv'n that Faith to remain here?
Pil
But then that Faith was on Conditions giv'n;
Which soon I found you never cou'd perform
Queen,
Wherefore?
Pil
Because the Gift you offer'd, was no Gift
Queen
What was no Gift? The Present which you priz'd so!
Pil
Had it been real, it had been inestimable
You only gave me Words, and the vain Promise
Of what the Gods had taken from your Pow'r
Queen
Surely thou ravest,
Is not Diana 's Priestess in my Pow'r?
Pil
Her Body is; but tho' it be a glorious One
Without her Soul, I wou'd refuse the Treasure
But love alone can of her Soul dispose;
And, without leave obtain'd of you,
The God had frankly done it
Queen
Ha! To whom!
Pil
How fain you wou'd extort this Secret from me?
Queen
How fain I wou'd? by Heav'n I will extort it
Pil
You never shall; I know I am to bleed,
And with me too the fatal Truth shall die
Queen
Then 'tis no Truth, and thou wilt die a Villain
Die with the Brand of an ungrateful Traytor,
An odious Hypocrite
Pil
To be reveng'd for these opprobrious Wrongs,
I need but tell you what you ask, proud Princess
Queen
Do it then
Pil
Will you persist to urge me?
Queen
I will. The Priestess! Who has touch'd her Heart?
Pil
In your own Breast the fatal Secret's lodg'd
Queen
Lodg'd in my Breast!
Pil
Ask, ask your self the Question, who is he
Who finds the way of touching Scythian Hearts?
Queen
Ha! Gods! That stings
Aside
Here Guards, withdraw your Pris'ner,
And bring Diana 's Priestess hither instantly
Exeunt with Pil
By yon Bright Goddess, He's come off with Honour
But Oh, the exalted Virtue of his Friend!
Who freely for his Friend can Life resign,
And for his Mistress can contemn a Crown!
This Raises him still more in my Esteem
It wou'd do, had he made a better Choice
And is the Priestess then preferr'd to me?
Have I, who have had the Ambition to behold
Admiting Monarchs at my Feet adoring,
Li • 'd to reflect, with mortifying Soul,
That I my self, to one unknown, have offer'd,
And been, O Gods! by one unknown refus'd?
And for Diana 's Priestess too refus'd!
Refus'd! Scorn'd! loath'd! Oh, how that tears my Heart!
But if thou hast a Soul, with treble Scorn
Return it: Suffer him to take this Priestess;
And let his despicable Choice revenge thee
What! must he gain her by the odious Boast,
That he has sacrific'd me to my Creature?
And can I suffer it? I cannot think of it
Without Distraction. But the Priestess comes
Enter Iphigenia
So; From whence come you? Ha! whence these Disorders?
What makes you tremble? And what strikes you dumb?
Iph
To such a haughty and insulting Look
I have not learnt to answer
Queen
I look, as it becomes me, on my Slave
Iph
The sight of such a Slave shou'd make you humble,
By shewing you to what excess of Wretchedness
The Daughter of a mighty King may fall
Queen
Say, From whence come you? I command you answer
Iph
I have no Pow'r to speak
Queen
So hasty was your Flight?
Iph
Who must not fly from acting Cruelties,
At which Barbarity it self can melt?
Queen
Oh, how those meek and melting Words
Become the soft and tender Race of Tantalus!
Iph
The Race of Tantalus has been revengeful
But yet it ne'er was bloody unprovok'd
What have these Grecians done to me?
Queen
What hadst thou done t' assembled Greece at Aulis?
What hadst thou done to thy own Father there?
Who to thy Ruin, unprovok'd, consented;
Nay, press • d it, urg'd it
Iph
My Mother urg'd it not
I from the Heroines of our Race have • e • rnt
To shew soft Pity
Queen
Thou from the Heroines of thy Race hast learnt,
Thou hast, fond Maid, to shew a guiltier Passion
Oh, how their kind Reception of their Guests
Had made their Names throughout the World renown'd!
Iph
For an Example of such kind Reception,
Perhaps I need not fly to Greece
Queen
I understand thee well
Plagu'd by the Terrors of impending Wrath,
Thou would'st provoke and hasten Death, thou would'st,
And have him swifter that he may be gentler,
But know, fond Maid, thou shalt not die so early,
Think of thy Gratitude to thy Preserver,
And think what that deserves
Iph
My preserver!
Queen
Was ever such audacious insolence?
Who was it sav'd thee from immediate Death,
At thy Arrival on the S •••• of Tauris?
Iph
Would I had been a Man at that Arrival,
For then my Blood had •• ain'd your cruel Altars!
Queen
O wretch, ingrateful to that black Degree,
As to disown the mighty Obligation,
By which thou liv'st to sa •• thou art not oblig'd!
Would'st thou insinuate that thy Sex preserv'd thee?
Iph
Men are the Victims that your Goddess claims!
Queen
Not always
Iph
Tradition says so, and your bloody Rites
Are founded on Tradition
Queen
When she her self declares her awful Will,
Tradition's of no force
But not the feeble voice of faint Tradition;
No, the loud call of the descending Goddess,
Claim'd thee at Aulis her devoted Victim,
At least so Calchas said
Iph
The fraud of Calchas plainly she Detected,
By suffering me to evade th'inhuman Altar
Queen
'Twas Clytemnestra's Sacrilege preserv'd thee,
And not the Goddess;
Who wracking thee on this her sacred Shore,
Strongly appears to Redemand her Fugitive
Iph
Before these Grecians came you had no such thoughts
Queen
No, thy soft graceful look, and seeming innocence,
Inclin'd me to suspect the crafty Calchas
But thy black Guilt appearing with thy Ingratitude,
Makes me repent of my mistaken pity
Iph
O fatal pity ▪ Rightly term ▪ d mistaken?
True pity would have suffered me to bleed;
Then I had been at rest in the Dark Grave,
With my unhappy Parents!
Not have convers'd with everlasting woe,
In you Dire Tabernacle of Despair!
For there no smiling Beam of Joy is seen;
No gladsom sound is ever heard,
But all is always rueful Lamentation,
Queen
If thuo'rt so sensible of this,
Then know that there's a punishment preparing for thee,
A punishment that's worthy thy perfidiousness
If 'tis so terrible to see these Sights,
So woful but to hear these sounds of Sorrow,
What must it be to act the bloody Office?
What must it be to one who has a Soul
As soft as thine, as melting ev'n as Mercies,
Iph
Ah miserable me!
Queen
To act it, nay, and act it on a Grecian?
One who himself has only tender thoughts,
Or only tender Thoughts at least towards thee
One who perhaps could die for thee, for whom
Perhaps ev'n thou could'st die?
Iph
Ah Gods!
Queen
See how her Soul declares its weakness,
And now unable to contain its grief,
Pours forth a Deluge of Impetuous Sorrow!
What must it be to think the Dreadful time
Of doing this accursed Deed approaches!
That the next Moment thou must stain thy Hands,
By going to his Heart a cursed way?
While thy Soul hears th'intolerable Sound
Of his last dying Groans, and sees his Eyes
His Trembling dying Eyes, that in Deaths cruel'st pangs
Look kindly up, as if they blest their Murtherer?
Go bring the Eldest of the Captives hither,
To some of the Guards who go out
Priestess alone, I leave thee with thy Lover,
But know thy Conference with him must be short;
And know that yet 'tis in thy power to save him
But let not pass the irrevocable Moment;
Think that the next comes hurrying on, and then
Unless thou first perswad'st him to abandon thee,
Thou shalt behold him to the Altar drag'd,
Where by thy Hand he dies, and when that's done,
Thou, Thou shalt by the sacred Steel expire,
Thou the devoted Victim of the Goddess
Guards! On your Lives, observe them at a distance
Ex. with Train
Iph
Inhuman Queen! Must I not only lose him,
But must I urge him to forsake me? No,
Alas thou need'st not urge him, ▪ that assure thy self;
For what would'st thou perswade him to?
To avoid Death, and to embrace a Crown?
A little argument will there prevail,
But the Queen says 〈...〉 , is 〈...〉 ?
No, 'tis the Vision of a 〈...〉 Woman
But say it should be true, forbid it Gods ▪
Oh should He love me, 〈...〉 taste of misery,
Which ev'n in this 〈...〉 ▪
For I could die 〈...〉 he lo •• me,
How can I plead 〈...〉 my self successfully?
How can I e'er find 〈...〉 can perswade him
To make another Happy 〈...〉 thought!
To make another Happy ▪ and me Miserable?
I cannot, I can see him 〈...〉 first
Perish! By whom! Ah w • tch! Inhuman wretch!
And canst thou then at last resolve to Murder him?
Enter Orestes
See where He comes, and with a Look so sweet,
As might disarm ev'n Death, ye Gods, ye Gods,
Who have resolved that I must be a wretch,
Beyond whatever Mortal was before;
Take care that I prevail to my undoing,
And give me strength enough to court Despair
Or
Madam, I come to hear your last Commands,
Let them be what they will, yet I with Joy am come
But why upon this lovely Brow,
So black a clo%d of Sorrow?
Iph
Oh could you see my Heart ▪ and all the Horrour
Which wildly rages there, how would you pity me?
Or
Alas! ev'n now I pity thee!
Iph
Do you?
Or
Yes, from my very Soul, you cannot think
How much Compassion tears my tortur'd Heart
Iph
Make hast then, and prevent the cursed Blow,
That I'm compell'd to strike
Or
Had I a Dagger, I would do it instantly
Iph
There is an easier way at least to you
Or
Name it
Iph
I cannot
Or
Why?
Iph
Grecians abhor
That Virgins of Affairs like this should speak,
You have beheld 〈...〉
Or
O 〈...〉
Iph
Wherefore 〈...〉
Or
Too well 〈...〉
And would not 〈...〉
Which I can never 〈...〉
Iph
Then I am 〈...〉
But why should you 〈...〉
Or
Reason and Justice 〈...〉
I love another
Iph
Ha! Then his fatal 〈...〉
What ground the Queen had for her strange suspic • on
You love another?
Or
O more than Life, you see I love another
Iph
Whom?
Or
That let me Hide ev'n from 〈...〉
Iph
Ha! Why should you conceal it from her?
Or
Ask me no more
Iph
I must, and you must answer
Or
She is my Mortal Enemy
Iph
Can any Woman prove a Mortal Enemy ▪
To one who loves like you?
Your passion known perhaps had made her kind
Or
'Tis to avoid her kindness • conceal it
Iph
T'avoid it?
Or
More than Ten Thousand Deaths I dread her kindne ••
Iph
You love your Enemy, and drea her Kindness?
Or
She is by force, and 〈...〉 Choice my Enemy
She pities me, ev'n from her 〈...〉
Yet my hard Fate compells her to be cruel to me
But ye Gods!
How much I suffer from 〈...〉
Than from her Cruelty 〈...〉
Iph
O Heaven and Earth, I tremble least the Queen
Had but too just a ground for her suspicion
Aside ▪
Or
Who can see her, he Loves in Grief,
And bear an equal Mind?
How might my Passion known, augment her Sorrow?
Iph
But what can force her since she is so tender,
T'appear your Mortal Enemy?
Or
Why should you ask! Your questions but disturb me!
Iph
I ask to save you, and I must be answer'd;
Speak, what can force her, since she is so tender,
T'appear your Mortal Enemy?
〈...〉
Aside
〈...〉
〈...〉 Thoughts in me,
〈...〉 l Deed
〈...〉
〈...〉 Fury that thou dream'st not of
〈...〉
Or
Never
Iph
Gods! Am I 〈...〉 who loves me!
〈...〉 these Convulsions?
〈...〉 Suppose that you were forc'd
〈...〉 wou'd it not shake you?
〈...〉 Murther,
〈...〉 say,
〈...〉 Heart?
〈...〉
〈...〉 it
〈...〉 you
〈...〉 obey?
〈...〉
〈...〉
〈...〉
Aside
〈...〉 like a Fury?
〈...〉
〈...〉
Or
〈◊〉 , how that stings •• ▪
Aside
Iph
Ha! what, you 〈◊〉 and tremble, and turn pale!
When the bare mention works on you so terribly
Can I endure the thing?
Or
The Pow'r that you adore, and that commands it,
Will calm, and will support you
Iph
What if one God commands the dreadful Deed?
Perhaps another mightier Pow'r forbids it;
And if I do it, 〈...〉
Not to be born 〈...〉
Without Despair and 〈...〉
Which then shall I 〈...〉
Or
Which of 〈...〉
Iph
Thou ask'st 〈...〉
His awful Name's 〈...〉
Or
When 〈...〉
Iph
Ev'n now 〈...〉
Or
Where?
Iph
Here, 〈...〉
Or
Here?
Iph
Here, look 〈...〉
Or
Ha!
Iph
Is' he not manifest 〈...〉
Or
Oh astonishment!
Iph
If thou art blind, 〈...〉
Know, that thou feel'st 〈...〉
And own'st his dreadful 〈...〉
Or
Amasement!
And canst thou be so infinitely 〈...〉
To love this ▪ Object of Divine Displea •••• 〈...〉
Oh this pathetick Silence how it 〈...〉
How this Disorder in thy 〈...〉
And quite destroys my 〈...〉
Iph
Cou'd you see all the 〈...〉
Cou'd you behold my Heart 〈...〉
Or
I have been shewn 〈...〉
And in that Sight I saw a 〈...〉
Iph
Think what's to 〈...〉
Or
I do, I do, my Soul's 〈...〉
Iph
Reflect upon my 〈...〉
Or
Damnation! 〈...〉
And what must I endure!
Iph
Have Mercy then upon yourself and me
Or
O for a Dagger!
That plunging it in my Heart's Blood,
I might to both shew Mercy
Iph
That Thought's a Dagger; there's another way
Or
No!
My Heart, my Life, my very ▪ Soul is yours
My Honour and my Virtue are the Gods
They are Depositums entrusted with me;
And I'll, untouch'd, with my last Breath restore them
〈32 lines〉
〈...〉 Grecian, the Queen has sent • s to inform thee,
That •• y Delay has mortally offended her;
And Death and Vengeance chase thee now in view
Here, you must to the Temple guard the Priestess
To some of the Guards
And you in Iron Bonds must bind the Pris'ner
To others
Then lead him where the Ministers expect him,
To bind his Temples, and to veil his Eyes
Or
Stay but one Moment, when a Wretch requires it,
The only happy Moment I ere knew
1 Scyth
We dare not; for severely we're forbidden
The Grecians who were seen upon the Beach,
With their drawn Weapons 〈...〉
And if thou shouldst 〈...〉
The Queen has sworn 〈...〉
That we shall all of us 〈...〉
D'y' hear? We 〈...〉
The Cornets with their 〈...〉
Bind him, you Slaves 〈...〉
How dare you stand 〈...〉
Or
My Grecians 〈...〉
I'd give the World 〈...〉
While they bind 〈◊〉
But since it will 〈...〉
I ask not Liberty, 〈...〉
I ask not ev'n a 〈...〉
Pour down your Plagues on my devoted Head,
Torment me, rack me, • ear me,
Torture me any way, unless by torturing he ••
Comfort her poor afflicted Heart, ye Pow'rs!
And grant, that at our next accursed meeting,
Grant, cruel Gods, that mine be all the Pain
Iph
Break Heart, that we may never meet again
The End of the Fourth ACT
ACT. V
SCENE The Outward Temple
Enter Queen, Priests and Priestesses
1 Pr
SAve us ye eternal Pow'rs that save the Just
2 Priest
Protect us, great Diana!
1 Priest
What dismal Night is this?
2 Pr
A dreadful Night indeed!
1 Pr
Sure all the Elements will now be wrack'd,
And 'tis the end of all things
Queen
Are you the Sacred Ministers of Heav'n,
And yet afraid of Thunder?
1 Pr
Wh • n Jove 's disturb'd, what Mortal dares be calm?
Queen
I who am conscious of committing nothing,
That may provoke his Anger
Are all things ready?
Pr
They are, ev'n now th'adorn the fatal Image
〈22 lines〉
〈...〉 Grecians are 〈...〉 And is it possible?
〈...〉 could they force in spight of your resistance,
〈...〉 up the M • un ••• n's Steep ascent?
〈...〉 You have heard how first by slow Degrees they ascended,
While as they mounted d • sky Clouds arose
And Heaven appear'd to s • o • l upon th' Attempt,
And lowring blacken'd all their March, while ours
Upon the Margin of the horrid Summet,
With threatning Dares impatiently expected them
But when within our Javelins reach they arriv'd
Upon the sudden Jove declar'd aloud for them
The dreadful Thunder from behind them roar'd,
While at our Scythians Eyes the blasting Lightning flew,
The Grecians with a shout that breath'd Defiance,
Receiv'd th' Auspicious Signal; and the Thunder
Seem'd as an Instrument of War t'excite them
Hear ye Barbarians! H • ar great Jove they cryed,
Threatning Destruction to your cursed Race
And as the Rocks Restor'd the Dreadful cry
Murmuring they clash'd a formidable Din
Upon their flaming Shields, then shook their Horrid Spears,
Their Spears that bristled with th'amazing Beams
Of the Retorted Lightning; Hideous they ascended,
As flaming Furies mounting from the Abyss,
While all our Scythians look'd like pale Offenders,
When they behold Hell's Ghastly 〈...〉
Queen
Infamous Slave • 〈...〉
Scyth
This fron • 〈...〉
Where I, great Queen, by 〈...〉
Prepar'd the 〈...〉
When lo the 〈...〉
The Mournful 〈...〉
When in 〈...〉
I hurrying drag 〈...〉
Queen
And 〈...〉
Scyth
Not I 〈...〉
As we were 〈...〉
The Grecians that 〈...〉
Had driv'n our 〈...〉
And quite o'ercome 〈...〉
Swift as the Lightning 〈...〉
And in a Moment, 〈...〉
Queen
And thou art alive to tell this ▪
Scyth
My Life was of Importance to your Service ▪
And therefore I preserv'd it
A panick Fear had now dispers'd our Scythians ▪
Some fell, some sled, but all remain'd Disorder'd
Iby this Voice alone retriev'd the Fainting,
Confirm'd the Doubtful, and recall'd the Flying
Ralli • d by me, they still maintain'd their ground,
When I withdrew to inform ▪ you of your Danger,
And know your further pleasur •
Queen
O Death to all my Hopes! [ Aside ] Return I charge 〈...〉
If thy 〈...〉 dear to thee, with speed Return;
And tell th • se Scandals to the Scythian Race,
That they had better never have been born,
Than • 'er behold my Ev •• without the Prisoner?
Tell them, they can but dieby Grecian Hands;
And if they die by them, they die with Honour,
And they who die with Honour, die with Pleasure
But should they owe their Deaths to my Revenge,
Shout
O • Thou, O Heaven! that shouts the shout of Triumph,
• ead in my Eyes the Rest, and fly to inform them
Ex. Scyth
1 Pr
The Gods apparently reject this Sacrifice
Queen
How durst thou think so?
1 Pr
The prodigies so lately seen confirm it
Scarce had the Night upon her Carr ascending,
Thrown her black Influence round the Mournful Hemisphere,
When a Mad Whirlwinds Subterranean blast,
Made the Dome tremble from its deep Foundation
And shook the dreadful glories of its Spires
〈33 lines〉
Yet hide themselves from 〈...〉 they have given
A Spirit, worthy of the 〈...〉 ?
Enter 〈...〉
Ha! Art thou then return'd ▪ What do 〈...〉 Grecians?
Scyth
The Grecians make a surely slow Retreat
Queen
And where's the Victim?
Scyth
Look where the Scythians guard him towards the Altar
Queen
You are just ye pow'rs in all your ways!
Now let the Rites begin
The flat Scene draws and discovers the Altar, Iphigenia on the one side, and Euphrosine on the other in Mourning postures. The Victim veild is introduced by flat Trumpets, a Train of Priests and Priestesses and Guards. The Victim is led 〈...〉 ; after that a dreadful Symphony, and then the following Ode
Ode for the Sacrifice. Three Priests, Chorus of Priests and Priestesses. 1 Pr. HAil great Diana, • ear and s •• , Chor. We Sacrifice thee. 2 Pr. Hail Moon that with thy silver Light, Govern'st the Empire of the Night, Look down and see, Chor. We Sacrifice to thee. 3 Pr. And thou the Dreadfull'st of the three, Hail Infernal Hecate! Ascend and see! Chor. We Sacrifice to thee. II. Thee, Great Diana, thee, Goddess renown'd for Chastity, Thee first of all we Invoke, To see us strike the fatal stroke. On him who with a Heart prophane, Thy very Altars sought to stain. Thy presence open'd the dark Womb And gave him Entrance to the Light; Thy presence too must open the sad Tomb, And send him to Eternal Night. III. Chor. Thee Goddess, thee, we all invoke To see us strike the fatal stroke. 2 Pr. Thou Mo • n that with thy Silver Light, Govern'st the Empire of the Night; Thee, Goddess, thee, we next Invoke, To see the fatal stroke. As Horrour thou art pleas'd to see, Horror loves to g ••• on thee. Each Fiend, and ev'ry ghastly Spright That so abhors thy Brother's Ray, Yet oft forsakes eternal Night To revel in thy paler Day. Chor. Thee, Goddess, Thee we next invoke, Look down and see the fatal Stroke. IV. 2 Chor. She sees, she sees, a gloomy Red H •• half her glowing Face o'erspread. But, • h behold, o'er half her Light, Some Charm d ••• ses gloomy Night; I • must be some Thessalian Charm, 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 your Trumpets, give the alarm; Let ••• 〈...〉 the Sky, 〈...〉 , 〈...〉 your Drums, A •• ••• the Victim die. V. 2 Pr. But hold, till lastly thee, 〈◊〉 Hecate! Queen of Furies we invoke, Ascend and see the fatal Stroke. Ascend from everlasting Night, Blasting Nature with the sight; VI. She comes, she cleaves the trembling Ground, And spreading horrour all around, D ••• ly dies the misty Air, Her dark and gri •• ly Features fright, The coal black Steeds that drag the Night, And Nature's Ce • ti • els they sc • re, Heark how with dreary Shriek the Owl, And ▪ frighted W • lv • s with dreadful Howl, Her dire approach declare. Chorus: She's here, her Guard of Furies se • , And Furies now as great are we, Her Spirit rages in our Souls, And in our frantick Eyes it rowls. To the dismal Deed she's come to excite us, And nothing but Blood can delight us; Give us Blood, give us Blood, Give us a Flood, Let it flow, let it flow, Strike, strike the fatal Blow
Ode for the Sacrifice. Three Priests, Chorus of Priests and Priestesses
1 Pr
HAil great Diana, • ear and s •• ,
Chor
We Sacrifice thee
2 Pr
Hail Moon that with thy silver Light,
Govern'st the Empire of the Night,
Look down and see,
Chor
We Sacrifice to thee
3 Pr
And thou the Dreadfull'st of the three,
Hail Infernal Hecate!
Ascend and see!
Chor
We Sacrifice to thee
II
Thee, Great Diana, thee,
Goddess renown'd for Chastity,
Thee first of all we Invoke,
To see us strike the fatal stroke
On him who with a Heart prophane,
Thy very Altars sought to stain
Thy presence open'd the dark Womb
And gave him Entrance to the Light;
Thy presence too must open the sad Tomb,
And send him to Eternal Night
III
Chor
Thee Goddess, thee, we all invoke
To see us strike the fatal stroke
2 Pr
Thou Mo • n that with thy Silver Light,
Govern'st the Empire of the Night;
Thee, Goddess, thee, we next Invoke,
To see the fatal stroke
As Horrour thou art pleas'd to see,
Horror loves to g ••• on thee
Each Fiend, and ev'ry ghastly Spright
That so abhors thy Brother's Ray,
Yet oft forsakes eternal Night
To revel in thy paler Day
Chor
Thee, Goddess, Thee we next invoke,
Look down and see the fatal Stroke
IV
2 Chor
She sees, she sees, a gloomy Red
H •• half her glowing Face o'erspread
But, • h behold, o'er half her Light,
Some Charm d ••• ses gloomy Night;
I • must be some Thessalian Charm,
〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 your Trumpets, give the alarm;
Let ••• 〈...〉 the Sky,
〈...〉 ,
〈...〉 your Drums,
A •• ••• the Victim die
V
2 Pr
But hold, till lastly thee,
〈◊〉 Hecate!
Queen of Furies we invoke,
Ascend and see the fatal Stroke
Ascend from everlasting Night,
Blasting Nature with the sight;
VI
She comes, she cleaves the trembling Ground,
And spreading horrour all around,
D ••• ly dies the misty Air,
Her dark and gri •• ly Features fright,
The coal black Steeds that drag the Night,
And Nature's Ce • ti • els they sc • re,
Heark how with dreary Shriek the Owl,
And ▪ frighted W • lv • s with dreadful Howl,
Her dire approach declare
Chorus
She's here, her Guard of Furies se • ,
And Furies now as great are we,
Her Spirit rages in our Souls,
And in our frantick Eyes it rowls
To the dismal Deed she's come to excite us,
And nothing but Blood can delight us;
Give us Blood, give us Blood,
Give us a Flood,
Let it flow, let it flow,
Strike, strike the fatal Blow
A shout just as the Ode ends
Queen
Oh insolence, audacious, insupportable!
Look out and see who 'tis that dares disturb
The Execution of this dreadful Ceremony
Enter Messenger
Mess
Great Queen, provide betimes for your security,
The Greeks returning, bear down all before them,
And the next moment will invest the Temple
Queen
Are all the Gates madefast?
Mess
They'r all with Bars of solid Brass secur'd
Queen
Then I'll prevent them, Priestess do thy Duty
Iph
Goddess, look down, thy Priestess is thy Victim
Offers to stab herself, the Victim throws off his Veil, and 〈...〉 the Knife from her, discovering himself to be Pilades; 〈...〉 same time speaking as follows
Pil
Oh hold, 'tis Sacrilege to strike that stroke,
Thy Beauties are the Darling care of Heav'n;
Look up, and see the Wonder it has wrought
On purpose to preserve them
Queen
May I believe my Eyes! Amazing sight!
Euph
Miraculous Events!
Pil
Thou thought'st to die for the dear Man thou lov'st,
And I, alas, am come to die for him
Iph
O all ye Pow'rs whose Wisdom rules the Universe,
Let me adore the Wonders of your Providence!
Queen
Revenge thy, injur'd Handmaid, great Diana!
Revenge thy injur'd self, we're both betray'd,
By my own faithless Subjects we're betray'd
Pil
No, cruel Queen, thou see'st I am come to die,
And satisfie you both
Queen
Where is thy Friend?
Pil
Where! at the Head of his Victorious Grecians
Queen
Oh, cursed Fate!
What brought thee here, to suffer in his stead?
Pil
Agreement with your Scythians, and desire
To save the only Man of all the World,
That's fit to be a Friend, by gaining time
Enough for his Embarkment
Queen
What hast thou said? Agreement with my Scythians?
Oh the vile Traitors! Why should they agree to it?
Pil
To save themselves
After our Greeks had forced my God-like Friend from them,
They who soon found their Victim irretrievable,
And knew what torments they must undergo,
Unless they could make you think they had retriev'd him,
They who with Wonder had beheld the Pow'r
Of 〈...〉 Friendship in my Friend and me,
To my Apartment c • me half dead with fear,
Where they inform'd me of our Gr •••••• Valour,
Your Threats, their baseness, and my Friend's escape,
I 〈...〉 gain time for hi • Embarkment,
〈...〉 and die for him
Queen
〈...〉 the Altar thus unbound?
Pil
〈...〉 I agreed with them
Death 〈...〉 embrac'd,
But the 〈...〉 of a Slave,
My free •••• soul disdain'd ▪
〈...〉 W •• ever any thing thing so great?
〈...〉 And yet so tender and so true?
〈...〉 me Grecian, but so nobly,
〈...〉 beauteous as thy Fraud,
〈...〉 that thou must die,
〈...〉 a God like Action!
〈...〉 • he! Must he die for it?
To Iph
〈...〉 it all ye Pow'rs!
〈...〉 selves inspir'd this wondrous Virtue,
〈...〉 least, he ne'er shall die
〈...〉 . But die th •• •• st;
〈...〉 Rites, and great Revenge require it
〈...〉 thy Office
〈...〉 O • never, never!
〈...〉 . Ah, miserable Creature! think with trembling,
What Vengeance thou art drawing on thy Head
••• the time presses, I shall be prevented,
• ake thou the sacred Steel, and strike the Blow
To another Priestess
Scyth
Make way for the Elder of the Captives there, Make way
Queen
For the Elder of the Captives!
As the other Priestess is going to strik • , Orestes enters, runs between the Dagger and Pilades, and embraces him
Or
He lives, he lives, I have him in my Arms,
This turn, ye Pow'rs, has made amends for all
Queen
Confusion! I am lost, the Greek • are here,
Strike thro' them both
Iph
Ah, cruel fight! Ah, Gods! I cannot bear it
Thus, let me intercept the barbarous Blow
A • the other Priestess goes to strike, Iphigenia interposes
Queen
O Death and Vengeance! Her, her Heart transfix
Priest
Who's the chief Priestess?
Queen
Hers, li • t thy ex ••• ting Arm, haste, strike,
I'm lost, undone, on every side betray'd,
And the next moment we shall be prevented
Or
O hurt not her, by Heav'n and Earth I adjure you ▪
• o • I am come alone, and come to die
Queen
What say'st thou? 'Tis impossible
Or
'Tis certain
Queen
Wert thou not Rescued by thy Friends?
Or
I was ▪
Queen
Hast thou been retaken then by our S • ythians?
Or
Your Scythians are dispers'd, and we are Victors
Queen
Where are thy Grecians then?
Or
Upon the horrid sommet of the Cliff,
By my Command, obsequiously they wait
Queen
How got you entrance?
Or
At the Iron Wicket of the Postern, where
Arm'd with a hundred Javelins, Death stands Centry,
And none can there unlicens'd pass and live
Queen
What brought thee to this fatal place alone?
Or
I come to die
Queen
Thou com'st to die! the Conquerour comes to die!
Or
Af • er our Greeks had forced me from your Scythians,
And the sho • t Fury of the Fight was past;
As soon as the Retreat we slowly made,
Had giv'n me time for thought;
My Joy soon vanish'd all, for soon I found
That I had left all that I held most precious,
All that was dear to my afflicted Soul,
Ev'n in the Jaws of Fate,
Strait I prevail'd upon my valiant Friends
T'attempt a second Rescue
Then to my Friend's Apartment we all flew,
To force his Guards, the Guards indeed we forc'd,
But him we found not, there I grew inform'd
Of his deplorable, tho' God ▪ like purpose;
That his inimitable Love for me
Made him to a bloody doom devoted stand,
At these inhumane Altars
Swift as a Storm we hurried to the Temple,
But when I found the Massy Gates all barr'd,
The dreadful Rites begun, and my poor Friend
At the Altar, and about to breath his last,
To breath his last for me;
Witness ye Pow'rs, that thought I could not bear,
With rigorous Commands I enjoyn'd my Friends
To leave me to the adverse Gods and Fate
For Gods and Fate cry'd out that I must bleed,
Or else surviving ev'ry minute die ▪
My Friends unwilling ▪ yet with Tears ob • y'd;
And here alone th • Conquerou • 's come to die
Queen
Unheard of Friendship!
Euph
Un •• ampl • d Faith!
Iph
O Const • ncy Di • i •• !
Queen
Was 〈◊〉 ••• n so great a sight
Of glorio • s W • e before!
Euph. to Iph
Courage, my Princess, for the Gods declare for us,
They are here among us ▪ they are manifest;
For these are plainly more than Human Actions ▪
Queen
I am o'recome, I yield y' Almighty Powers,
To hurt such Vi •• ue were to touch your selves,
Such Virtue is Divi • ity
Here, set them free immediately
Pr
Whom?
Queen
The Grecians
Pr
Both?
Queen
Both
Pr
Then, wh • re's the Victim for our Solemn Rites?
Queen
The Goddess has herself declar'd her Victim
Pr
Whom?
Queen
Enquire no more, but set thy Prisoners free
Pr
They are free
Queen ▪ to Or
Gr • cian I need not be asham'd to own
That I am charm'd by thy exalted Virtue
The Immortal Powers themselves are fond of less
Twice in one night has it prevail'd upon me
To give thee Life, to give thee Liberty;
But since thou shew'st thou valuest not thy own,
I here bestow thy Friends upon thee too
Or
From my soul ▪ I thank you
Queen
But Custom, which ▪ 〈◊〉 Scy •• i ••• Law ▪ requires ▪
That they whom my Pr • rogative ▪ ••• s free,
Must become Scythians ▪ by Espousing Scythian • ▪
Or—
Or
But Liberty in that too will be necessary
Queen
As free as is the Wind shall be thy choice
Thou shalt be for • 'd in nothing, yet permit me ▪
To give thy Wife a Dowry worthy thee
Thy Souls surpassing greatness I admire!
Which Heaven that form'd it sure design'd for Empire;
Accept of mine, thy wiser nobler Sway
Will polish these Barbarians into Men
Thine are the vast extended Plains of Tauris
My self, my Subjects, Men and Women, all
Shall govern'd be by thy unbounded Sway;
The Soveraign Partner of thy Royal Bed
Among a thousand Scythian Beauties choose,
And make her happy who's most worthy thee
Then I am lost again
Iph. aside
Pil
Art thou not mov'd?
Or
Amaz'd, confounded, Gods! Are these the words
Of a Barbarian, of a Savage Scythian?
But, be she what she will
Such generous Passion I ne'r knew till now,
No, not in Greece, but oh its Artful modesty!
Queen
What, no reply?
My Present sure deserves at least your Thanks
Or
Oh! It deserves much more than I can pay!
Oh! It deserves my Heart, my very Soul
And now, ev'n now I ought to be beheld
Paying my Adorations at your Feet;
And off'ring all my self with fervent Vows
But oh! have pitty on so lost a Creature,
Who has no Heart, no Soul, no Vows to pay,
Who has given all these, who has given himself away
A Voluntary Slave, one so accurst,
That though he mortally detests Ingratitude,
Yet wants the power, nay wants the very will
To pay th' Immense acknowledgment he owes
Queen
Suppose some God should free you from this Passion?
Or
I wish not to be free
Queen
Yet put the Case you were this moment free,
Might I expect to find you grateful then?
For Grecian, I am loth to think you hate me
Or
Hate you! O Heaven! of all your lovely Sex
You I esteem, and you I most admire,
Should I say more, I basely should deceive you
To wrong you in that Nature, that indeed
Would be the height of black ingratitude
For all my softer thoughts another claims;
Who, though the tenderest of her gentle Sex,
Yet has a Tyrants force upon my Soul
But were I not prevented by that Passion,
Now Prostrate at your Feet you should behold me,
Prouder to obey your absolute Commands
Than to Controul th' extended Plains of Tauris
Queen
May I believe thee?
Or
Yes, could I haue resolv'd to say what's false,
You had heard a falshood that would more have pleas'd you
Queen
But swear
Or
Propose the Oath
Queen
Swear by the dreadful Altar you have escap'd
Or
By this Tremendous Altar then I swear
Queen
This Altar then shall free that from a Passion
That's so unworthy thee, 〈◊〉 like the Priestess,
To the Ministers
For her the Goddess 〈◊◊〉 her Victim
Here, take 〈◊〉 , bind 〈◊〉 drag her to the Altar,
And in he • 〈◊〉 some plunge the Sacred Steel
Pr
O Heaven! The Priestess!
Or
Impious Proposal!
Pil
Think not that we will e're endure that sight
Queen
Think not that you'll endure it! Think where you are
You both are in my power
Pil
They who dare die are always in their own
Our Breasts shall intercept th' accursed blow
Queen
Guards, 'tis your Duty to take care of that
Or
No barbarous power can force us to survive her
Queen
Die then, and prove the Plagues which for the Perjur'd
The direful Goddesses prepare below,
As soon as she expires, thou to be mine
Hast by th' inviolable Altar sworn
Or
In what a Mase, O Fate, am I entangled!
But think, reflect, by all the Gods I adjure you
And Oh regard that lovely dying Face,
Meek and resign'd in these extreamest Sufferings
Oh look and stop th' Abominable Blow!
Mercy, sweet Mercy will it self
Be murder'd by that Blow
Look, cast your Eyes around, behold a sight
Enough to dissolve Flint, see these Barbarians
Whose Eyes have been inur'd to ghastly Murder,
Whose Cr •• son Arms are dy'd with horrid Grain,
Ev'n they Dissolve, they me •• their Eyes shed Tears,
Those Cruel Eyes that • ever 〈◊〉 before
Look how they're seiz'd with hidden Horror all!
But above all look up, be hold your Goddess!
Think that you see her 〈◊〉 wrathful Frown
Denouncing Plagues on your Devoted Heads!
Think that already her avenging Arms
Are lifted, and prepare the dreadful Judgments
That must be pour'd on this accursed Race,
Revenging with its utter extirpation,
Her Priestess Murder'd, and here Shrine prophan'd
Pr
Seythians, 'tis true
These Judgments we must fearfully expect
If we lay impious Hands upon the Priestess
All Scyth
Unbind the Priestess, set her free immediately
Queen
Hear me first, Scythians, and you Grecians hear!
Scythians, what slavish Doubt has seiz'd your Souls?
What • ear you? To provoke the dreadful Goddess!
This is her Victim; she her self has claim'd her;
Nay, and with so much vehemence has claim'd her,
She left th' Immortal Mansions of blest Beings
On purpose to demand her, and too long
This Priestess has already liv'd Devoted to her
I till this hour, forgive it awful Goddess,
I by a Tender weakness mov'd, preserv'd her;
And Heaven best knows how I have been rewarded
Now for you, Grecians, you too shall be satisfi'd
Pil
No, never, if she dies
Queen
Yes, though she dies, for when you know this Priestess
You will your selves demand and urge her Fate
At least if you're the Sons of those brave Grecians
Who carried their Heroick Arms to Asia,
And with a thousand Sail Beleaguer'd Troy
With one accord your Fathers urg'd her Fate,
Nay her own Father to the Altar doom'd her,
Because the severe Goddess had exacted her
Pil
May I believe my Sense? Am I awake!
Or
O all y' Immortal Powers! How am I tortur'd
By the fierce pangs of wondrous Expectation!
Queen
But Death by her Mothers Artifice she escap'd,
While a young Lesbian Slave in Shape and Size
And Age resembling hers, in a long Veil
Was at the Altal offer'd in hear stead
Or
Support me! Gods! Support me!
Queen
Why dost thou thus exclaiming interrupt me?
Or
Oh! I have most amazing things to tell you!
But first Important Questions I must ask
I have Important things t' enquire of her
And Queen, assure thy self on what I say
Thy Peace, thy lasting Happiness depends
Queen
Speak, but be short then, what are the Gods doing!
Or
Say then, poor, lost, abandon'd Virgin, say,
Didst thou from bleeding at a Grecian Altar
By thy fond Mothers Artifice escape!
Iph
I did, and thank the Gods a thousand times for it;
By that escape I have liv'd to dye for thee
Or
Talk not of Death, alas, but answer me,
O thou art sure the ▪ Darling Care of Providence,
And it has wrought prodigious things to save thee!
How com •• it that thy strange Escape ▪ in Greece
Was never hea • d or talk'd of •
Iph
Of 〈...〉 wretched Parents
Were 〈...〉 it, 〈...〉 night inform'd me
They • adly 〈...〉 by a 〈...〉
Or
O Miracle of 〈...〉 O Transport ▪
Iph
My Sisters both werein 〈...〉 • nfancy,
My Brother scarce had seen the 〈...〉
Or
By Heav'n and •• rth it can be no •• but 〈...〉 ,
See Helens Form upon that lovely Front!
Aside
Answer but one thing more, say from what Altar
Didst thou escape, and by what Artifice?
Iph
Alas 'tis a long Story,
And my weak Spirits, by my Grief opprest,
Will let me say no more
But in my Cabinet it large 'tis written,
Yet grant me this, my first and last Request,
To Greece transport the Writing
Or
Talk not of Writing • , Writing • may be lost;
But tell me in a word what I must say,
What and to whom?
Iph
Inform my Friends and Kindred then • t Argos,
That the forlorn abandon'd 〈...〉 —
Or
O supreme Jov • , whose P ••• idence has wrought this!
Iph
What makes you lif • your 〈...〉 to Heaven,
And starting thus exclaim?
Or
Was ever Vision of the Night so strange,
So wonderful as this! Say on, say on
Iph
Tell them at Argos, that •• or Iphigenia,
Whom fondly they believ'd at 〈...〉 sacri •• c'd,
Escap'd the Altar there ▪ but that the Goddess
Upon the Shore of Ta • ris found her Victim
And with, O wish my Brother, my Orestes,
A much more gentle Fate!
Or
Thus, thus, thy Brother, thy Orestes thanks thee
Embraces
Iph
My Brother! Oh!
Or
My dearest Sister!
Iph
Can it be true!
Or does my Sense, grown wild with Grief, delude me?
Qu
Her Brother! is it possible! her Brother!
Eup
Her Brother! and the powerful King of Argo • ▪
Qu
Is't possible! O the transporting Joy!
Impetuous Flood of unexpected Rapture!
Whether I live or no I cannot tell
Haste, Scythians, haste, upon your knees unbind her
Pil
Hold off your barbarous hands, presumptuous Slaves,
And let a Prince be honour'd with that Task
unbinds • er
Or
O Queen! O Friend! O Sister!
Was ever Night like this!
Pil
Thus to these lovely Limbs I Liberty restore
O woul • but the good Gods and she consent
That I for ever might remain a Captive
Qu. to Iph
Canst thou forgive me all this cruel Usage,
Of which Love only could have made me guilty?
Canst thou, thou tend'rest of all Humankind?
Ioh
Can you so much as ask it? all my Soul
Is to transporting Tenderness resign'd
Qu
Thou art all Goodness; in this strict Embrace
Let all Unkindness be forgot for ever
Or
Now, how shall we pay equal Thanks to Heav'n,
For this so great, so wonderful Deliverance?
Chiefly with flaming Zeal our Thanks to thee,
To thee our Thanks we pay, Divine Apollo!
And thy unerring Oracle adore
Next, let me pay my Debt to thee, my Pilades,
And with the best of Sisters let me bless
The kindest, truest and the best of Friends
She cannot now be mine, and ne'er shall be anothers,
Take her my Friend, thou art my very self,
The other, dearer Half of thy Orestes
Take her, and with her take ten thousand Joys,
All the high Raptures thy fierce Passion promises ▪
Thou answer'st not
Pil
Oh, I want Breath to speak, I die with Ecstasie!
And my tumultuous Thoughts above all Words are rais'd ▪
Here let me with dumb Eloquence experss 'em,
Here pour out the abundance of my Soul
Kissing her Hand
Or
And next to you, great Queen, I pay my Acknowledgments,
And now with Joy accept this Realm of Tauris,
That at your Feet you may behold a Slave
With two Imperial Sceptres
And now prepare to leave this barbarous Clime,
Here but by Deputy henceforward reign,
The Gods such Worth design'd to govern Greece,
To shine the Glory of the bravest Nation,
And give example to a Race of Heroines,
Who have Force to follow so sublime a Pattern
Your Goddess is the Partner of your Voyage
Whose Image great Apollo 's Deplhick Oracle ▪
Has with reiterated Voice demanded
Qu
The Prodigies of this •• upendous Night,
And Vision of the last confirm that Oracle
With me the Goddess shall to Greece remove,
And these inhumane Rites shall cease for ever
Or
The Gods are good, and Lovers of Mankind,
And that Religion that allows of Cruelty
Is not divine, but impious and abominable
Lastly our Thanks once more we pay to thee,
Son of immortal Jove, divine Apollo,
Who hast made good thy bounteous Oracles
We are preserv'd, and mighty Love preserves us
Now, from this wond'rous Night let Mortals learn,
When in obedience to the Gods they tread
The doubtful Paths of Destiny, to affront
The dreadfullest Dangers with a dauntless Spirit
Let 'em not ev'n in worst Extreams despair;
For while they keep to Virtue's narrow Paths,
With Guards invincible they march surrounded
The Gods who surely guide them on the way,
From them no more than from themselves can stray,
For Virtue's of Divinity a Ray
FINIS
EP • LOGUE, by Coll. Codrington
OUR Bard shall end to night, as He began,
Prologue, Play, Epilogue shall speak the Man,
Shew a more Tragick Poet if you can
With Pride he owns that he would gain your Hearts,
But he will use no little Whorish Arts
With Pride he owns, that 'tis his glorious Aim
To court and to possess the Tragick Dame
How can he court, or how can be possess,
Who shames the Goddess by a forein Dress?
That decks her like a trivial merry Muse,
Or a rank Strumpet, strolling from the Stews
Yet thus disguis'd she oft has here been shown,
To all her genuine Votaries unknown,
Yet still you thought the motly Garb her own
Oft have you seen her with the Comick Muse,
Walk hand in hand, Grimace and Posture use,
Debase her Majesty and Terror lose
What needs such Art your kind Applause to win
What need such Farce to drive away your Spleen,
Who thus are pleas'd have Farce enough within
Our Bard resolves to steer a diff'rent Course,
And travel upwards to the Grecian Source
Where he at first saw the chast, awful Maid,
And with observing Eyes her Charms survey'd
Those Charms he would with a bold hand express,
Nor make 'em • ainter by an English Dress
To please the Great, the Gen'rous, and the Fair,
Shall • ver be his Pride, and be his Care
Next he would stand the knowing Criticks Test,
To Fortune unconcern'd he leaves the rest
For well he knows the Ignorant and the Base
Scatter in waste their Censure and their Praise
FINIS
