Canonical Title: KING ARTHUR
Requested Title: KING ARTHUR
Authors: John Dryden
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_king-arthur-_dryden-john_1691
Item Title: King Arthur: ... 1691
Item Creator: Dryden, John.
Item Year: 1691
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: KING ARTHUR
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_king-arthur-_dryden-john_1691/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_king-arthur-_dryden-john_1691_djvu.txt
Scene m KENT. 


CY 


King ARTHUR: 


O R, 


TheBrialh \ orthy. 


ACT L SCENE L. 


Enter Conon, Aurelius, Albana&t. 


Coy. Hen this is the deciding Day, to fix 
Great Britain's Scepter 18 great Arthur's Hand. 
Aar, Or put it in the bold Invaders gripe. 
Arthur and Oſwald, and their different Fates, 
Are weighing now within the Scales of Heaven. 
Con. In Ten ſet Battles have we driven back 
Theſe Heathen Saxons, and regain'd onr Ezrth. 
As Earth recovers from an Ebbing Tide, 
Her half-drown'd Face, and lifts it ofer the Waves. 
From S:v+r-"s Banks, even to this Barren-Down, 
Our foremoſt Men have preſt cheir fainty Rear, 
And not one Saxon Face has been beheld 5 
Bur all their Backs, and Shoulders have been ſtuck 
With foul diſhoneſt Wounds : Now here, indeed, 
Becauſe they have no further Ground, they ſtand- 
Aur. Well have we choſe a Happy day tor Fight 3 
For every Man, in courſe of time, has found 
Some days are lucky, ſome untortunate. 


King ARTHUR: Or, 
Alb. But why this day more lucky than the reft ? 
Con, Becauſe this day 
Is Sacred to the Patron of our Ifk ; 
A Chriſtian, and a Souldicrs Annual Feaſt, (docia's Day. 
Alb. Oh, now I underſtand you, This is St. G:orge of Cappa- 
Well, It may be fo, but Faith I was Ignorant; we Soldiers 
Seldom examine the Rubrick; and now and then a Saint may 
Happen toſlip by us ; But if he be a Gentleman Saint, he will 
Forgive us. 
Con. Oſwald, undoubtedly will Fight it bravely. 
Aur. And it behoves him well, *tis his laſt Stake: [To Alb. 
But what manner of Man is this Q/wala? Have ye ever ſeen him? 
Al.Ne'er but once ; & that wasta my Coſt t003 I tollow'd him 
Andtoſay Truth,ſomwhat Uncivilly,upon a Rout; (too cloſe, 
But heturn'd upon me,as quick and as round,asa chatt*d Boar ; 
And gave me two Licks acroſs the Face, toput me 
In mind of my Chriſtianity. 
Con, I know him well ; he's free and open Hearted. 
Aur. His Countries CharaQter : That Speaks a German. 
Con. Revengeful, rugged, violently brave ; and once re- 
lolv'd is never to be movy'd, 
Alb. Yes, he's a valiant Dog, Pox on him 
Cox. This was the CharaQter he then maintain'd, 
When in my Court, he ſought my Daughters Love : 
My Fair, Blind; Emmelize. (wall: 
, Alb. 1 cannot blame him for Courting the Heireſs of Corr 
All Heirefes are Beautiful; and asBlind as ſhe is,be would have 
No Blind Bargain of her. , | 
Aur. For that Defeat in Love, he rais'd this War. 
For Royal Arrhur Reign'd within her Heart, 
Ere Oſwa/d moy'd lus Sute. 
Cox. Ay, now Aweliys, you have Nam'd a Man; 
One, whom beſides the Homage that I owe, 
As Cornwalls Duke, to his Imperial Crown, 
I wou'd have choſen out, from all Mankind, 
Fo be my Soveraign Lord. 
Aur. His Worth divides him from the crowd of Kings ; 
To Born,. without Deſert to be ſo Barn; 
Men, {ct aloft,. to be the Scourge of Heaven ; 
Azad. with lang Arms, to.laſh the Under-World. 


5 
- 


e Britiſh Worthy. 3 


Corr. Arthur is all that's Excellent in Oſwald ; 
And void of all his Faults : In Battle brave ; 
Bat till Serene in all the Stormy War, 
Like Heaven above the Clouds z and after Fight, 
As Merciful and Kind, to vanquiſht Foes, 
As a Forgiving Ged ; but ſee, he's here, 
And Praiſe is Dumb before him. 


Enter King Arthur, Reading « Letter, nuth Attendants, 


Arthur CGo on, Auſpicious Price, the Stars are kin] : 
Reading. Unfold thy Banners to the willing Wind ; 

While I, with Aiery Legions, help thy Arms ; 
Confronting Art with Art, and Charms with Charms, 
So Merlin writes; nor can we doubt th? event, [Ts Con. 
With Heav'n and you to Friends z Oh Noble Conon, 
You taught my tender Hands the Trade of War ; 
And now again you Helm your hoaty Head, 
And under Jouble weight of Age and Arms, 
Aſſert your Countries Freedom, and my Crows. 

Con. No more, my Son. 

Arth. Moſt happy in that Name ! 
Your Emmeline, to Oſwald's VowSrefus'd, 
You made my plighted Bride: 
Your Charming Daughter, who like Love, Born Blind, 
Un-aiming hics, with ſureſt Archery, 
And Innocently kills. 

Con. Remember, Son, 
You are a Oeneral, other Wars require you. 
For ice the Saxox Groſs begins to move. 

Arth. Their Infantry Embattel'd, ſquare and clo'e, 
March firmly on, ro fl the middle ſpace: 
Cover'd by their advancing Cavalry. 
By Heav*n, 'cis Beauteous Horrour : 
The Noble Oſwald has provok'd my Envy. 


Enter Emmeline, led by Matilda. 
Ha ! Now my Beauteous Exmelize appears 


Anew, but Oh, a ſofter Flame, inſpires me : 
B 2 


9 


\: Ur, 


: © # &y 
+ Jing p 
Even Rage and Vengeance, ſlumber at her fight. | 
Ccn. Haſte your Farewel; I'll chear my Troops and wait ye. 
| {Exi# Conon. 
Em. Oh Father, Father, I am ſure you're here; : 
Becauſe I tee your Voice. 
Arth. No, thou miſtak'ſt thy hearing for thy ſight ; 
He's gone, my Emmeline ; 
And I but ſtay to gaze on thoſe fair Eyes, 
Which cannot view the Conqueſt they have made. 
Oh Star-like Night, dark only to thy ſelf, 
But full of Glory, as thoſe Lamps ot Heav'n 
That ſee not, when they ſhine. 
Em. What is this Heav*n, and Stars, and Night, and Day, 
To which you thus compare my Eyes and: me ? | 
I underſtand you, when you ſay you love: 
For, when my Father claſps my Hand in his, 
That'scold, and I can feel it hardand wrink['d ; 
But when you graſp it, then I ſigh and pant, 
And ſomething ſmarts, and tickles at my Heart. 
Arth. Oh Artleſs Love ! where the Soul moves the Topgue, 
And only Nature ſpeaks what Nature thinks ! 
Had ſhe but Eyes ! 
Em. Juſt now you faid Thad: 
I {ce 'em, I have two. 
Artb. But neither ſee. 
Em. I'm ſure they hear you then: 
What can your Eyes do more ? « 
Arth. They view your Beauties. 
Em. Do not I ſee? You have a Face, like mine, f: 
Two Hands, andtwo round, pretty, riſing Brealts, a 
1 hat heave like mine. 
Arth. But you deſcribe a Woman. 
Nor 1s it fight, but touching with your Hands. 
Em. Then *tis my Hand that ſees, and that's all one : 
For 1s not ſceing, touching with your Eyes? 
Arth, No, forT lee at diſtance, where I touch not. 
Em. It youcan fee fo far, and yet not touch, 
fear you ſce my Naked Legs and Feet 
Quite through my Cloaths 4 pray do not ſce ſo well. 
£th. Tear not, weet Innocence ;, 


e Britiſh Worthy. 


I view the lovely, Features of your Face ; 
Your Lips Carnation, your dark ſhaded Eye-brows, 
Black Ey&, And Snow white Forehead ; all the Colours 
That make your Beauty, and produce my Love. 
Em. Nay, then, you do not love on equal terms : 
I love you dearly, without all theſc helps : 
I cannot ſee yaur Lips Carnation, 
Your ſhaded Eye-brgws, nor your Mjlk-white Eyes. 
Arth. You ſtill miſtake. 
Em. Indeed I thought you had a Nole and Eyes, 
And ſuch a Face as mine; have not Men Faces ? 
Arth.” Oh, none like yours, ſo excellently fair. 
Em. Then «you'd I had no Face ; for I wou'd be 
Juſt "ch 4 CAC 25 YOUu- 
Arth. 445, *i's vain to initrudt your Innocence, 
You have .0:10n of Light or Colours. 
Emm!. \\ 1 ,isnotthata Trumpet ? (Trumpet ſound within. 
Arth. Y CS. 
Em. 1 knew it, 
AndIcan tell you how the ſound on't looks: 
It looks as if it had an angry fighting Face. 
Arth. "Tis now indeed a he unpleaſant ſound, 
Becauſe it calls me hence, from her I love, 
To mcet Ten thouſand Foes. 
Em. How does ſo many Men ee'r come to meet? 
This Devil Trumpet vexes %em, and then 
They feel about, for one anothers Faces ; 
And ſo they meet, and kill. 
Arth. Tl tell ye all, when we have gain'd the Field; 
One kiſs of your fair Hand, the pledge of Conqueſt, 
And lo a ſhort farewel. Kyſſes ber Hand, and Exit with 
1 Aurel, Alb. and Attendants, 
Em. My Heart, and Vows, go with himto,the Fight : 
May every Foe, be that, which they call blind, 
And none of all their Swords have Eyes to find him. 
But lead me ncarerto the Trumpet's Face; 
For that brave Sound upholds my tainting Heart ;, 
And while I hear, methiaks I fight my Pays, 1 ke 
GEpide ted by, Niece 


; "Pp 'M 


6 King ARTHUR: Or, 
Exter Oſwald and Oſinond. 


The Scene repreſents 4 Heathen worſbip ; The three Sax0w 
Goas, Lorna $. grad, rs placed on Pedeſtal. An Altar. 


O/mo. 'Tis time to haſten our myſterious Rites ; 
Becauſc your Army waits you. 

Olwald mating three Bows before the three Images. 

O/wa, Thor, Freys, Woaen, all ye Saxon Powers, 

Hear and revenge my Father Hexgft's death. 

Oſmo. Father of and Men, great Wodey, hear. 
Mount thy hot Courkr, drive amidſt thy Foes ; 

Liſt high thy thund*cing Arm, let every blow 
Daſh out a miſ-believing Briton's Brains. 

Ofwa. Father of Gods and Men,great Woaer hear ; 
Give Conqueſt to thy Saxon Race, and me. 

O/mo. Thor, Freys, Wodew, hear, and ſpell your Saxons, 
With Sacred Runick Rhimes, from Death in Battle. 
Edge their bright Swords, and blunt the Britons Darts. 
No more, Great Prince, for ſec my truſty Fiend, 
Who all the Night has wing'd the dusky Air: 

Grimbald, a fierce carthy Spirit ariſes. 

Whatnews, my Grimbald ? 

Grim. I have plaid my part ; 
For I have Steed the Fooks that are to dye ; 
vix Fools, fo prodigal of Life and Soul, 
That, for their Country,they devote their Lives 
A Sacrifice to Mother Earth, and Wed-n. 

Oſmo. 'Tis well ; But are we ſure of Vittory ? : 

Grim. Why ask'ft thou me ? b- 
Inſpect their Intrails, draw from thence thy Guels : 
Bloud we muft have, without it we are dumb. 

Oſmo. Say, Where's thy fellow-ſervant, Philiae!? 
Why comes not he ? 

Grim. For, he's a puleing Sprite. 

Why didſt thou chuſe a tender airy Form, 
Unequal to the mighty work vt Miſchief; 

His Make is-flitting, ſoft, and yielding Atomes : 
He trembles atthe, yawning gulph of Hell, 

**r dares apprazxcÞthe Flame, lelt he ſhou'd ſinge 
'audy ſilken Wings, 


—— ST -- "Ty & Le. : 


. 


a 


» Britiſh Worthy, 


He fighs when he ſhould plunge a $:ul in Sulphur, 
As with Compaſſion, touch'd of fooliſh man. 
O/z. What a halt Devils he? 
His Errand was, to draw the Low-land .damps, 
And Noiſom vapours, from the ſoggy Fens: 
Then, breath the baleful ftench, with all his force, 
Full on the faces of our Chriſtned Foes. 
Grim. Re drein'd thoſe Marſhy-grounds ; 
And bagg'd '*em in a blue peſtiferous Cloud-; 
Which when he ſhou'd hee blown, the frighted Elf 
Eſpy'd the Red Croſs Banners of their Hoſt ; 
And ſaid he durlt oor add to his damnation. 
O/m. Ple puniſh him at leiſure ; 
Call in the Victims to propitiate Hell® - 
Grim. That's my kind Maſter, I ſhall break faſt on %m?. 
Grimbald- goes 18 tbe Dovr, and: 
Re-enters. with 6 Saxons in 
White, . with Swords in their 
hands. They-range themſelves. 
'3 and 7} in oppoſition to each» 
other. 


The reſt of the Stage is fill d with Prieſts and Singers. 


\ N [Oden, firſt to thee, 
A Mi A Steed, in Battle wonz. 


We have Sacri fic'd. 
Chor. VVe have Sacri fic'd. 
Verl. Let our next .Oblation be, 


To Thor, thy thundring Son, 
Of ſuch anther. 
Chor. We have Sacrificd. 


Verl. A third; ( of Friezeland breed was be,). 
To Woden's Wife, and to Thor's Mothes:- 
And now we have atton'd all three 
| We have Sacrific'd. 
Chor. VVe bave Sacrific'd, 
The: 


And from this Day begin thy Saxon date. 


8 Kins ARTHUR: Or, 
2 Voc. The VV bite Horſe Neigh'd aloud. 
To, VVoden thanky we render. 
Y To VVoden, we have vow'd, 
Chor. To VVoden, our Defender. 
| - F The four laſt Lines 
Verl. The Lot i# Caft, and Tanfan pleard: 
Chor. Of Mortal Cares you ſhall be eas'd, 
Brave Sonls to be renown'd in Story, 
Honogg prizing, 
+ 1, Neath acfpiſng, , 
+11 Dome, eoguirin 
'T F; 
Die, Its the fruit of Glory. * 
Brave Souls to be renown'd in Story. 
Verl. 2. I call yeal, 
To VVoden's Hall ; 
Jour, Temples, round 
VVith Twoy' bouhd, 


In Goblets Crown'd, 
And plenteous Bowls f burniſh'd Gold ;;-. 
VVhere you ſoall Laugh, | 


| And dance and quaff, 
* "The Fuice, that makes the Britons bold, 


The fix Saxons are led off by the Prieſts, in 
Order to te Sacrifed. 
' 3. , \ 

On/. Ambitious Fools we are, * ta Ta, 
And yet Ambition is a Godlike Fault : 
Or rather, "tis no Fault in Souls Born great, 
Who dare extend their Glory by their Deeds. 
Now Britany prepare to change thy State, 


A Battle ſuppoſed to be given behind the Scenes, 
with Drums, Trumpets, and Military Shouts and Fx- 
curtions : After which, the 'Britons, exprotiiny their 
Joy for the Victory, fin; this *ong ol! Triumph. 


Ome if you dare, our Trimpeo's Cant; 
Come if you dare, the Fozs rebours. © 


IVe come, we Come, WC 00;720, We (uae, 
Says the denble, dinble, double Beat of the fone 
( dring Drune. 
Now they charge on amain, 
Now they rally: again : 
Te Gods from above the Mad Tabour behold, 
And pity Mankind that will perifh for Gold. 


The F ain'img Saxons quit their Grount, 
Their |rumpets Lanziuſh in the Sound ; 


They fly, they fly, they fly, they fly ; 
Victoria, Victoria, the L/4 Biitons cry. 


Now the Vitory's won, 

To the Plunder we rug : 
IWe return to our Laſſes like Fortunate Traders, 
Triumphant with Spoils of the Vaaquaſh d Invaders. 


C 


-— »- > wt 


ACT TIL 


. 
C9 — ——— — —_— 


Enter Philidel, 


Pl. Las, for pity, of this bloody Field F 
Piteous it needs muſt be, when I, a Spirit,. 
Can have ſo ſoft a ſenſe of Humane Woes ! 
Ah! for ſo many Souls, as but this Morn” 
Were cloath'd with Fleſh, and warm'd with Vital Blood, 
But naked now, or ſhirted but with Air. 
[Merlin, with Spirits, d:ſcends to Philidel, 
on a Chariot drawn by Dragons. 

Mer. What art thou, Spirit, of what Name and Order ? 
(For I have view'd thee in my Magick Glals,) 
Making thy moan, among the Midnight Wolves, 
That Bay the filent Moon : Speak, I Conjure thee, 
*'Tis M r/in bids,thee, at whoſe awful Wand, 
The pale Ghoſt quivers, and the grim Fiend gaſps. 

Phil. An Airy Shape, the tender'it of my kind, 
The laſt ſeduc'd, and leaſt deform'd of Hell ; 
Half white, and ſhuffA'd in the Crowd, I fell ; 
I-lirous to repent, and loth to fin, | 
Awkward in Miſchief, piteous of Mankind, 
My Name is Philidel, my Lotin Air, 
Where next beneath the Moon, and neareſt Heay'n, 
þ ſoar; and have a Glimpſe to be receiv'd, 
For which the ſwarthy Demons envy me. 

Mer. Thy Butinels here ? 

Pi!. To thun the Saxon Wizards dire Commands, 
Oſmond, the awtuPlt Name next thine below, 
'Cauſel retus'd rohurla Noyſom Fog 
Q@: Chriſten'd Heads, the Hue and Cry of Hell 
Is rais'd againſt me, for a Fugitive Spright, 

Atr, Oſmond ſhall kaaw,, a greater Power protcQs thee ; 


But: 


SEG Lal g "x 


_- -” 
"=—_ bs 
F-4s i os. 


— 4 
: : — —_ — C —_——— hs 
hk "2g ; * —_ Tau : Am 


_— 
= 


The Britiſh Worthy. * 


But follow thou the Whiſpers of thy Soul, 
That draw thee nearer Heav'n. 

And, as thy place is neareſt to.the Sky, 
The Rays will reach thee firſt, and bleach thy Soot. 

Phil. In hope of that, I ſpread my Azure Wings, 
And wiſhing (till, for yet I dare not pray, 

I bask in Day-light, and behold with Joy 
My Scum work outward, and my Rult wear off, 

Mer. Why, 'tis my hopeful Devil z now mark mt, Ph;/iat!, 
I will employ thee, for thy future Good : 

Thou know'ſt, in ſpite of Valiant Ofvald's Arms, 
Or O/mond's Powertul Spells, the Field is ours. — 

Phil. Oh Maſter! batten 
Thy Dread Commands ; for Grimbald is at Hand ; 
Oſmond's fierce Fiend, 1 ſnuff his Earthy Scent : 

The Conquering Britons, he miſleads to Rivers, 
Or dreadful Downfalls of unheeded Rocks ; 
Where many fall, that neer ſhall riſe again. 

Mer. Be that thy care, to ſtand by falls of Brooks, 
And trembling Bogs, that bear a Green-Sword ſhow. 
Warn off the bold Purſuers from the Chace : 

No more, they come, and we divide the Task. 
But leſt ferce Gr:mbaia's pond'rous Bulk oppreſs 
Thy tender flitting Air, I'll leave my Band 

Of Spirits with United Strength to Aid thee, 
And Force with Force repel. 


Exi: Merlin o» h: Chariot, 
Merlin's Spirits ftay with 


Piiidel. 


Enter Grimbald in the Fibit of « Shepherd, follow 4 by King 
Arthur, Conon, Aarclius, AibanaCt and Sld;ers, 
who wander at a diſtance in the Scenes. 


Grim, Here, this way, Britons, follow Ofra/a's flight ; 
This Evening as I whilſtPJ out my Dog, 
Todrive my itraggling Flock, and pirch'd my Fold, 
I faw him dropping Swear, o'er labour'd, ſtitt, 
Make faintly as he could, to yonder ell. 
Tread in my Steps; long Neighbourhood by Day 


w I 
” nos - WT RO _—_ - 


12 King ART HUR: Or, 


Has made theſe Fickds familiar in the Night. 
Arth. 1 thank thee, Shepherd ; 
Expc& Reward, lead on, 'we follow thee. 


Phil. Hither this way, this way bend, 

kings. 3 Truſt not that Malicious Fiend : 
Thoſe are falſe deluding Lights, 
Wafted far and wid by Spriohts.. 
Truſt 'em uot, for they'll deceive ye 3 
And in Bogs and Marſbes leave ye. 


Chor.of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend. 
Chor.of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend. 


Phil. | IF you ſtep, no Danver thinking, 

lings. $ Pown you fall, a Furlong finking : 
'Tis a Fiend who has annoy ye; 
Name but Hea&/n, and he'll avoid ye. 


Chor.of Phil.Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend. 
Chor.of Grimb.Spirits. This way, this way bend. 
Philidels Spirits, Truſt not that Malicious Fiend. 


<yrr by ” 


Grimba'c's Spirits. Truſt me, I am no Malicious Fiend. 


Philidels Spirits. Hether this way, &c. 


= 7 ” » 
& LY 
—_——— 


Con. Some wicked Phantom, Foc to Human king, 
Milg des our Steps. 

A'ba, VIL follow him no farther. 

Grimbald ſperks. Py He'l ſhe lings *em back, in my deſpight; 
T had a Voice in Heav'n, ere Sulph'rous Steams D 
zid damp'd it to a hoarſenefs 5. bur Pl! try. 


2 DritlÞ W OrtDy. 


He ſings. Let not a Moon-born Elf miſlead ye, 
From your Prey, and from your Glory, 
, Too far, Alas, be has betray'd ye : 
Follow the Flames, that wave before ye : 
Sonretimes feu'n, and ſometimes one ; 


Hurry; burry;' burry, hurry on. 


A 


a 7 


See, ſee, the Fapſieps plain apearns 
That way Oſwald choſe for flying : 
Firm ts the Turff, and fit for bearing, 
Where yonder Pearly Dews are lying. 
Far he cannot henee be gone 

Hurry, burry, hurry, burry on. 


Upon the Sod, no falling Dew-Drops have 


Diſturb'd the Print, F/ are n0ing 10 follow Grimbald, 


Philidel fmgs. Hitber this way. 


Chor.of Phil. Spirits. Huber this way, this way b:r:d. 


| Aur. 'Tis true, he ſays; the Footſteps yet are freſh 


Chor.. of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend. 


Philidels Spirits. Truft not that Malicious Fiend. 


Grimb. Spirits. Truſt me, I am no Malicizus 


ie = - * 
$ © 
Seine + 


P:nlidels Spirits. Hither this way, &c. 


Tho, all-incline to | 


Fiend; 


hilice!.. 


&r [ be 


” I 
Grim. ſpeaks. Curſe on her Voice, I muſt my Prey foregy ; 

Thou, P+:/idel, ſhalt anſwer this, below. 

[Grimbald ſinks with « Flaſb, 


A-th. Art laſt che Cheat is plain ; 
The Cloven-foored Fiend is Vaniſh'd from usz 
Good Augels be our Guides, and bring us back. 


Phil. ſinging. Come follow, follow, follow me. 
Chor. Come follow, 8c. 
| And me. And me. And we. And me. 
Verſ. 2 Voc. And Green-Sword all your way ſhall be. 
Chor. Come follow, &c. 
Verſ. No Goblin or Elf ſhall dare to offend ye. 


Chor. No, no, no, &c. 
No Goblin or Elt ſhall dare to offend ye. 


Verl. 3 Voc. VVe Brethren of Air, 


You Hero's will bear, 
To the Kind and the Fair that attend Yes 


Chor. VVe Brethren, &c. 


Philidel «ud the Spirits go off ſinging, with J 
King Arthur and the reſt in the middle | 
of theme. 
Enter Emmeline led by Maiilda. Pavilicn Scene. b 


Fm. No News of my Dear Love, or of my Father ? 
Mt, None, Madam, fince the gaining of the Battel ; 
Great Arthur is a Royal Conqueror now, 
And well delerves your Love. 
Fas. But now I tear 
He'il be too great, 10 love poor lilly me. 


e Britiſh Worthy. 


If he be dead, or never come agen, . 
I mean to die: But there's a greater doubt, 
Since I neer ſaw him here, 
How ſhall I meet him in another World? 
Mat. 1 have heard ſomething, how two Bodies meet, 
But how Souls joyn, I know not. | 
Em. I ſhou'd nd him, 
For ſurely I have ſeen him in my Sleep, 
And then, methought, he put his Mouth. to mine, . 
And eat a thouſand Kiſſes on my Lips z 
Sure by his Kiſhng I cou'd find hum our 
Among a thouſand Aagels in the Sky. 
Mat. But what a kind of Man do you ſuppoſe him ? 
Em, He muſt be made of the molt precious things : 
And I believe his Mouth, and Eyes, and Cheeks, 
And Noſe, and all his Face, are made of Gold. 
Mat. Heav'n bleſs us, Madam, what a Face you make lum.. 
If it be yellow, he mult have the Jaundies, 
And that's a bad Diſcaſe, 
Em. Why then do Lovers give a thing fo bad 
As Gold, to Women, whom lo well they love? 
Mzt. Becauſe that bad thing, Gold, buys all good things, 
Fm. Yet I muſt know him better: Of all Colours, 
Tell me which is the pureſt, and the ſotteſt, 
Mat. They ſay *tis Black. 
Em. Why then,' fince Gold is hard, and yet is precious, 
His Face muſt all be made of ſoft, black Gold. 
Mit. But, Madam 
Em. No more; I have leari'd enough for once. 
Mit. Here are a Crew of Kentiſh Lads and Lailes 
Wou'd cntertain ye, till your Lord”: retu.n, 
With Songs and Dances, to divert your Cares. 
Em. O bring *em in, 
For tho? I cannot ſee the Songs, I love em ; 
And Love, they tell me, is a Dance of Hearts. . 


» — 


—_— 
< ” 


DO p 
Exter Sh:pherds and Shephcrdeſſes. 


1 Shep- How bleſt are $ bepherds, how happy their L aſſes, 
herd c IV bile Drums &» Trumpets are ſounding Alarms! 
{ings. ( Over our Lowly Sheds all the Storm paſſes; 
And when we die, 'tis in each others A ms. 
All the Day on our Herds,and Flocks employing; 
All the Night on our F lures, and in enjoying. 
Chor. All the Day, &c. 


2. 
Bri-ht Nymphs of Britain,with Graces attended, 
Let not your Days without Pleaſure expare \ 
Honour s but empty, and when Touth is ended, 
All \ten will praiſe you, but none will deſire, 
Let not lonth fly away without Contenting : ; 
Age will come ou bn for your Repenting. 

Chor. Let not Youth, & 


Heietle \{:z offir their Flutes to the Women which they refuſe, 


2 Shep-! Sheys xerd, Shepherd, leave Decoying, 
herdell.) Pipes are ſweet, a Summers Day ; 
But 4 Tine after Toying, 
I omen have the Shot to Pay. 


2, 
I lere ap Marriage-Vows for ſigning, 
Set thetr Marks that camot write : 
After that, without Repming, 
Tliy and IWelcom, Day and Night. 


Ire the Women give the Min Contrads, which they acc: pt. 


Chor. 


4 


Chor. 7 Come, Shepherds. lead up, a lively Meaſure ; 

of all. C The Cares of VYedlock, are Cares of Pleaſure : 
But whether Marrjage bring Joy, or Sorrow, 
Make ſure of this Day, and bang to Morrow. 


The Dance after the Sono, and Exgunt 
Sbepheras and Shepherdeſſss. 


Enter on the other ſide of the Stege; Olwald and Guillamar. 


Oſw. The Night has wilder'dvs; and we are faln 
Among their foremolt Tents. 
Gull. Ha! What are theſe ! 
They ſcem of more than Vulgar Quality. 
Em. What Sounds are thoſe? They cannot far be diſtant : 
Where are we now; Mat ilds ? ' 
Mat. Juſt before your Teat : 
Fear not, they mult be Friends, and they approach. 
Em. My Arther, fpeak, my Love; Are you return'd 
To bleſs your Emmeline ? 
Oſwa. to Guilla, 1 know that Face : 
'Tis my Ungrateful Fair, who, ſcorning mine, 
Accepts my Rivals Love : Heav'n, thou'rt bounteous, 
Thou ow'ilt me nothing now. 
Mat. Fear grows upon me : 
Speak what you are 3 ſpeak, or I call for help. 
Oſma. We are your Guards, 
M:. Ah me! We are beiray'd; *cis Oſwala's Voice. 
Em. Let 'em not ſee our Voices,and then they cannot find us, 
Of.». Paſhons in Men Opprels'd, are doubly ſtrong. s 
I take her from King Arthur ; there's Reveng: : 
If ſhe can love, ſhe bnoys my ſinking Fortunes: 
Good Reafons both: Pll on. - --— Fear nothing, Lacs, 
You ſhall be ſafe. Ofrald 4:8 Guillamir [cre Emm- 
meiline and Matilas, 
Em. & Mat:l. Help, help ; a Rape, a Rape! 
Oſwa. By Heavn ve injure me, tho 7orce is us'd; 
Your Honour ſhall be ſacred. 
FE me. Help, he'n, ON B-:rr9vs, hotn ! 
O/wa. Your Br:tons cannot help You: 
D Th: 


— 


Y — 
” 


This Arm, through all their Troops, ſhall force my way s 
Yet neither quit my Honoar, -nor my Prey. "+ * 
\ Exeayit, the Women ftiT crying. 


4n Alarm within : Some Soldiers running over the 
Stage: Foal, follow, folfar. 


| Enter Albana@ Captain of the Guards, with Soldiers. 


Alb. Which way went th” Alarm. 
1 Sil, Here, towards the Cattle. 
A'b. Pox 0 this Vittory ; the whole Camp? debauch'd : 
Al Drunk or Whoring: This way, follow, follow. Exenzr. 
The Alarm renews : Claſhing of Swords within for awhile, 


Re-enter Albana&t, Officer and Soldiers. 


Officer, How fits the-Conquelt on great Arthur's Brow 
Alks. As. when the Lover, with-the King is mixt, 

He puts the gain-of Briea/w-1n a Scale, 

Which weighing with the loſs of Emmel:ine, 

He thinks hes ſcarce a Saver. Trumpet within. 
Officer, Hark !. a Trumpet ! 

It ſounds a Pariey. 
Alba. *Tis from Oſwald then, 

An Eccho to King: Arthur's Friendly Summony, - 

Sent ſince he heard the Rape of Emmeline, 

To ask an Interview; Trumpet anſwering on.the. other (ae. 
Offc:r. But hark! already 

Our Trumpet makes reply ; and. ſee bath preſent: 


Enter Arthur on one ſide attended, O\wald'on the other 
with Altendants, and Guillamar.. Zhey 
meet. and. ſalute. 


4 


Arthur. Brave @ſv:l7! We have met on Friendlier Terms, 
Companions of a War, with Common Intereſt 
Againſt the Bordering P:&s : But Times are. chang?d, 


— Bn. x . ſ . ' 4 : 
Ore, AntT.omforry itt ethos line are-chant?!s 


Bunk. $28 111,15 Eo MANCE» Up; 71,70 V., 


a # F 
* = 4 tn. I. 


. 


The Britiſh Worthy. 


Arth. Tf ſo we meet not now, the {aulc's your own; 
For you have wrong'd me much. 
O/wa. Oh you wou'd tell me, 
I call'd more Saxons in, i enlarge my Bounds : 
If thoſe be Wrongs, the War has well redrels'd ye. 
Arth. Miſtake me not, I count not War a Wrong: 
War is the Trade of Kings, that fight for Empire ; 
And better be a Lyon, than a Sheep. 
O/wa. Ia what, then, have I wrong'd ye ? 
Arth. In my Loves 
O/wa, Even Love's an Empire too; The Noble Soul, 
Like Kings, is Covetous of lingle $ my 
Arth, | blame ye not, for loving Emmelize: 
But fince the Soul is free, and Love is choice, 
You ſhou'd have made a Conquelt of her Mind, 
And not have forc'd her Perſon by a Rape. 
Of.va, Whether by Force, or'Stratagem, we gain ; 
Still Gaining is our End, ia War or Love. 
Her Mind's the Jewel, in her Body lock'd ; 
If 1 would gain the Gem, and want the Key, 
[c follows I mult ſeize the Cabinet: 
But to ſecure your fear, her Honour is untouch's. 
Arth. Was Honour ever ſafe in Brutal Hands? 
So ſafe are Lambs within the Lyons Paw ; 
Ungrip'd and plaid with, till ferce Hunger calls, 
Then Nature ſhews it {elf ; the cloſc-hid Nails 
Are ſtrerch'd, and open'd, ro the panting Prey. 
But if indeed, you are fo Cold a Lover — 
O/wa., Not Cold, but Honourable. 
Arth. Then Reſtore her. 
Thar done, I ſhall believe you Honourable. 
Ofes. Think'ft thou I will forego a Viftor's Righ: F 
Arth. Say rather, of an Impious Raviſher. 
That Caſtle, were it wal''d with Adamantr, - 
Can hide thy Head, but till to Morrow's Dawn. 
wa. And cre to Morrow, I may be a God, 
If Emmeline be kind : But kind or cruel, 
I teli chee, Arthar, but to ſee this Day, 
That Heavenly Face, tho? not to have her mine, 
I would give up a hundred Years of Life, 
» 


£0 Kings XR THU R:'O0r, 

And bt Fate cut to Morrow. broraches 
Arth. lt ſoon will come, andthou repent too late ; 

Which to prevent, Pl bribe thee to be honeſt. 

Thy Noble Head, accuſtom'd to'a Crown, © * 

Shall wear it ſtill : Nor ſhall thy Hand forget 

The Sceptre's uſe : From M-away's pleafing Stream, 

To Severn's Roar, be thine. 

In ſhort, Reſtorg my Love, and fhare my _ 
Oſiwa, Not, tho” you ſpread my Sway from 7 hames torT ybey 5 

Such Gifts might bribe a King, but not a Lover. 

Arth. *Fhen prithee give me back my Kingly Word, 

Paſs'd for thy ſafe.return 3 and let this Hour, 

In ſingle'Combat, Hand to Hand, decide 

The Fate of Empire, and of Fomcline, 

Oſwa. Norg that'l fear, doI decline this Combat ; 

And not decline it'neither, but defer : 

When Emmeline has been my Prize as long 

As ſhe was thine, I dare thee to the Duel. 

Arth. 1 nad your utmoſt Term of Life ; To Morrow, 
O/wa. You are'not Fare: 
Arth. But Fate is in this Arm. 

You might have made a Merit of your Thefr. 4 
Oſrae. Ha) Theft ! Your Guards can tell, I ſtole her nor. 
Arth. Had I been preſent 
Ore. Had'you been preſent,ſhe had been mice more Nobly, 
Arth, There Yieg your way: £ 
Oſr1, My way hes where l pleaſe. 

Expcit (lor O/wmald's Mapick cannot fail ) 

A long To Viorrow, ere'your Arms prevail : : 

Or.if | fall, make Ropm ye bleſt above, 

t or one 110 was.undane, and dy'd for Love, 

5 hb _ Ex:t Ofwald and'hs Party. 
Arth, There*may be one Dlick Minuteere To Morrow: 
For who can tell, what Pow'r, and Ly, and Charms, 
May do this Night ? To Arms, with [pecd, to Arms, 


Ex77, 


ACT 


The Britiſh Worthy. * 21 
AG #3 E 


— — —— _ _” _ — w—  ——— —— — =_ _—__— 


Enter Arthur, Conon and Aurclius, 


Con. Urle up our Colours, and Unbrace our Drumss 
D {lodge betimes ; and quit this faral Coaſt. 
Arth. Have we forgot to Conquer ? 
Aurel. Caſt off Hope : 
Th' ImbattPd Legions of Fire, Air, and Earth, 
Are banded for our Foes. 
For goin; to diſcover, with the Dawn, 
Yon Souchern Hill, which promis'd tothe Sight 
A Riſe more eaſe to attack the Fort, _ 
Scarce had we ſtept on the Forbidden Ground, 
When the Woods ſhook, the Trees ſtood briſtling up ; 
A Living Trembling Nodded through the Leaves. 
Arth. Poplars, and Aſpen-Boughs, a Pannick Fright. 
| C-non, We thought lo too, and doubled (til! our pace. 
But ſtrait a'rumbling Sound, like bellowing Winds, 
Roſe and grew loud; Confus'd with Howls of Wclves, 
And Grunts of Bearsz and dreadful Hits of Snakes ; 
| Shreiks more than Humane ; Globes of Hail pour'd down: 
Fo An Armed Winter, and Inverted Day. 
' Arth, Dreadful indeed ! 
Aur. Count then our Labour's loſt : 
For otherway lies none, to mount the Ul, 
Unleſs we borro'y Winzss, ind fail thro” 4 
Arth, Now T perceive a Danger worthy Me. 
Tis Oſmond's Work, a Bind of He'il-hir'd Slaves : 
Be mine the Hezard, mine thall be the Faiac, 


Arihar is POINT ont, but 1s met hy \*c rlin,, 
1/9 tates him Ly the Hail, and brings 


him b. 65, 


> 


22 Ki ARTHUR: Or, 


Enter Merlin. 


(dangerous : 
M:rl. Hold, Sir, and wait Heav'ns time 3 th* Atiempts too 
There's not a Tree in that Inchantcd Grove, 
But numbred out, and given by tale to Fiends ; 
And under every Leaf a S;-irit couch'd. 
But by what Method to diſſolve thele Charms, 
Is yct unknown to me. 
Arth.Hadſt thou been here,(for what can thwart thy Skill?) 
Nor Emmeline had been the boaſt of O/ra'd ; 
Nor I fore-warn'd, been wanting to her Guard. 
Cor. Her darkn'd Eyes had {ten the Light of Heay'a 5 
That was thy promiſe too, and this the time. 
Mer, Nor has my Aid bcen abſent, tho' unſeen, 
With Friendly Guides in your benighted Maze : 
Nor Emm*lize ſhall longer want the Sun. 
Arth. 1s there an end of Woes? 
Merl. There is, and ſudden, 
I have employ'd a ſubtil Airy Spright 
T' explore the paſſage, and prepare my way. 
My ſelf, mean time, will view th: Magick Wood, 
To learn whereon depends its Force, 
Con, But Emmeline -—— 
Mer. Tear not : This Vial ſhall reſtore her ſight. 
Arth. Oh might I hope (and what's impoſſible 
To Mcrlix's Art) to be my ſclf the Bearer, 
That with the Light of Hcay'n ſhe may diſcern 
Her Lover firft, 3 
Mer. *Tis wondrous hazardous ; ; 
Yet I foreſee th* Event, *tis fortunate. of 
I'll bear ye fafe, and bring ye back unharm'd: 
Then lole not precious Time, bur follow me. 
>. Exeunt Omnes, Merlig leading Arthiut. 


Exter Philidel, Scene, « Deep Woed. 


Phi. 1 left all fafe behiad ; 
For in the hindmolt quarter of the Wood, 
(Ay tormer Lord, Grim Oſmond, walks the Round; 


>alls o'er the Names, and Schools the tardy Sprights. 

His Abſence gives me more ſecurity. 

At every Walk I pafs'd, I drew a Spell, 

$7 that if any Fiend, abhorring Heav*n, 

There ſets his Foot, it roots him to the Ground. 

Now cou'd I but diſcover Emmel xe, 

My Task were fairly done. [Walcing abort, a1d P; ; m7 
bet vixt the Trees.) 


Enter Grimbald r»ſbing out : He ſeizgs Philidel, and 
binds him in a Chain. 


Grimb. O Rebel, have caught thee / 
Phi!. Ah me! What hard miſhap / 
Grimb. What juſt Revenge / 
Thou miſcreant Elf, thou Renegado Scout, 
So clean, fo furbiſh'd, ſo renew'd in Whire, 
Fhe Livery of our Foes; I ſee thee through: * 
What mak'ſt thoy here ? Thou trim Apoltate, ſpe: k. 
Thou fhak*ſt- for Fear, I feel thy falſe Heart Pant. 
Phil. Ah mighty Grimbald, 
Who would nat Fear, whea ſeiz/d in thy ſtrong Gripz; 
But here me, Oh Renown'd,. Oh worthy Ficn4, 
The Favourite of our Chelf. 
Grimb, Away with fullſome Flattery, 
The Food of Fools z thou know'ſt where laſt we met; 
When but for thee, the Chriſtians had been ſwallow? 4 
In quaking Bogs, and Living lent to Hell. - 
Phil. Aye, then I was ſeduc'd by M-rliz's Art, 
And half perſuaded by his ſoothing Tales, 
To hope tor Heavn+s as if Erernal Doom 
Cou'd be Revers'd, and undecreed for me: 
But I am now fer Right. 
Grin;5, Oh ſtill thou think'it to fiy a Fool to Mark.. 
Phil. | fied from Merlin, tree. as Air that. bore me,, 
T*anfold to Oſmond all his deep Deligns, 
Grimb, IT bo!t:ve nothing, Oh thou toad Imp3ſtcr, 
Vien wert thou Tre tn Hell gifs pot thy Noa 


I ; "Is . , F £ I 
% S = © # *N 2 _ * * "+ * 3 . ' _- ' © 4 ® 4 ” - Ll F þ 


. 
C 


To O/mond ſha'lt thou go ; March,. know thy Driver. 
Phil. Kneeling. Oh {pare me Grimba/a,and Fil be thy Slave: 
Tempt Hermits for thee, in their Holy Cells, 
And Virgins in their Dreams. : 
Grin, Canſt thou, a Devil, hope to cheat a Devil ? 
A Spy ; why that's a Name abhorr'd in Hell ; | 
Halte forward, forward, or I'll Goad thee on 
With Iron Spurrs. 
Phil. But'ule me kindly then : LES 
Pull not ſo hard, to hurt my Airy Limbs 
PII follow thee unforc'd ; look, thete's thy way. 
Grimb. Ay, there's the way indeed ; . but for more ſurety 
I'll keep an Eye behind : Not one Word more, 
But follow decently. * Grimbald goes out araggins Philidel. 
Phil. afiat. So, catch him Spell. 
Grimb. within, 'Oh help me, help me, Ph:/idel. 
Phil Why, What's the matter? 
Grimb, Oh, I am enſnar'd; 
Heav'ns Birdl1me wraps me round, and glues my Wings. 
Loſe me, and 1 will free thee; 
Do, and Ill be thy Slave, 
Phil. What, to a Spy, a Name abhorr'd in Hell ? 
Grimb. Do not inſult, Oh, Oh, I grow to Ground 5 
The Fiery Net draws cloſer on my Limbs. 
Ph:1. Thou ſhalt not have the Eaſe to Curſe in Torments ; 
Bc Dumb for one half Hour 3 ſo long my Charm 
Can keep thee Silent, and there lie 
Till O/zzou4 breaks thy Chain, 
\ _ Philidel unbinds bis own Fetters, 


E-xer to him Merlin, with a Vial iz his Hand ; and Arthur. 


Mer, Well haſt thou wrought thy Safety with thy Wit, 
My Ph: del; go Meritorious on. 
Me, other Work requires, to view the Wood, 
And lcarn to make the dire Inchantments void. 
lean tune attend King Arthur in my Rooms 
Sew lum his Love, and with theſe Soveraign Drops, 
Relicre her Sight, 


Exit Mcriin giving & Viol to Philide!. 


Phil, 


Phil. We menſt work, we > haſte ; 
Noon-Tyde Hour, is almoſt poſt : 
Sprights, that glimmer in the Sun, 
Into Shades already run. 

Oſmond will be here, anon. 


Enter Emmeline «nd Matilda, at the far end of the Wood. 


Arth: O yonder, yonder ſhe's already found : 
My Soul direQs my fight, and flics before it. 
Now, Gentle Spirit, uſe thy utmoſt Art; 
Unſcal her Eyes ; and this way lead her 

Arthur withdrews behind the Scent, 
Emmeline a»d Matilda come forward 10 the Front. 


Philidel 2pproeches Emmeline, ſprinkling ſome of the 
Witer over ber Eyes, at of the Vial. if 


Phil. Thus, thu I infuſe 

Theſe Sovereign Dews. 
Fly back, ye Films, that Cloud her fb, | 
And you, ye Cbryftal Humonrs bright, 
Tour Noxious Vapours purg'd away, - 
Recover, and admit the mh 
Now 'caft your Eyes abroad, and ſee 

All but me. 


Em. Ha! What was that > Who ſpoke ? 
Mat. 1 heard the Voice; *tis one of O/mond's Fiends. 
Em. Some bleſſed Angel ſure ; 1 feel my Eyes 
Unſeald, they walk abroad, and a new World 
Comes ruſhing on, and ſtands all gay before me. 
Mat. Oh Heavens ! Oh Joy of Joys! ſhe has her ſight! 
Em. I am new-born; I ſhall run mad for Pleaſure, Staring 
ArcWomen ſuch as thou*Such I Creaturez? (an bom 
» Art 


K 


- 
__ « 


A 3 


Arth. aſide. Oh how I envy her, to be firſt ſeen ! 
Em. Stand farther;; -Nevenonabeimy: of light. !; Larking 


What's that a WR EY hgh (up, 
Makes me. EW, 'X hn, £ Pp 
Mas. *Tts: | 
Em. The Sun, 'ris ſuf Oe?" whe Heav'n: 
Oh, if thou art a Creature, beſt aid tatelty;//() 
How well art fn from Mortals 1o remote, 


To ſhi eÞy car 

How hait oi WS Legs. Wn - 

And let in; Kgowledge by another {coſe _ 
I gaze about, n,.;to-Day hoo AA on 4 
A Stranger yet, 77 w; the on EET IVE Thy 
Art thou n on Poly nes 

Doft 4a mY 
\6% 1 "at + 
Ao Nia 
Not to ha or Nature now 

Comes all at once,  nſdu ing my De KY 

But ah! what 1 hing am 4 12. Fain WOu d + know. , 
Or am I blind, or do fee bur half ?:'* 
With a] my Care, aid poqgr ry. 

I catigt Wew my) Faces , Land 


\\ 


=. 


Mat: Neve fe 
Bur by I R I a you. TY Caves ber a Gliſs. 
* Emm./ =, bY 
the Glaſs, tht CI Sithin 46 Oh Kr 'eet Face 3 
boking, Edraws the Mouth, ahdSmailes;and looks upon 
And talks3 ws, yer I cannot hear it, Speak : (me ; 
The pretty thing is Dumb. 

Mat. Ti 


hepretty OP | 


Yi CSR is you. © 
mm. t"Amt Cd ou 1 rhis Adoches me? 
Indecd it, Nak my Cloaths, has' Hands likethine ; 
And Magks. what &ef I do ; bur'thar Prn are .- 
{4am a aid Pd ſwear it my Child.” | MatildaGok:. 
= % ht He ; We Li e in theGlaſe- 


tro our Names 
FA on; 25720hs | 
- + Bl. Our Sbadgrs, «2h E us. 


oY 


Foun. Mi ea; pre Sh nf 
I Love ir ; 44 1 1 ro*ther J's 
AlasI've kils'd it D- ad; os fine Ws my ug it. 
Arthu thur comes fenert Rr wt Die IN 


Tis here again. 
Oh no, this Face is a4 IB nox FT 


I think the Glaſs has Sh farms F” 
Ha ! Whas $ thu #4 AS Gy. wwe, 

And other Cloat Feature too; Ye nog” 
But callos, jp (= in thy Look; Cu; ' 
Of a Comptrol ye,, Majeſtick es \ | 

Mat. Do you nA know him,, Madam f- 

Emm. Ist a M 


. * - 


Arth. Yes; And the mot begs of in 
It _ have etangd oor Lov ha EY 
Em." ty dearelt Lord | 
Was my Soul Blindg, agd.cou'c by at look put;T 
Te know 1s gre ot Spo 62 Oh'Counte 
Of our of Sex i” Well are” ye ritade'our Lo 


So bold, 1o great, nk Thing) m'd. . i 
How can RR Rn oa of Frauen / 
Four = 4 a was made 
ron 2 eb S! MY Uo 


Arth.- 
Bur a mgfe crous ; and a ave, 
To you, Shs t'Daliches of boi Kind, | 
. But are ye mine? Is there an cad of War : > 
Are pr er Trumhets De kd dong wake 
DR 3 


That us d.tg.kill Men wi 
Arth Te u 


And any a brea 
Ere + ou are free, 


En» m. How came ye 


A th. By M-y 
To feed my I Ds 
One Mom:#v38 

Emm. O  0ment, w 
oP cha Ye 

r VE» 
Let O/mon ap wt 
Tomgabe a1 


ni 


Ty 


og OY LIEN hs 


+? s dy 


- 


—— 
—— 


& U 


- 

Arth. aſide. Oh how I envy her, to be firſt ſeen ! 

Em. Stand farther ; : let me take my fill of fight. Lor{/s 
What's that above, that weakcas my new Eyes, np, 
Makes me nut fee, by ſecing ? 

M_t. * lis the Sun. 

Em. Thi Sun, "tis {ure 2 Cor, it that be Heav'n : 

Oh, it tho't art a Creature, belt and iaucit, 
How wcll art thou, from Mortais io remote, 
To ſhine, and not to. urn, by near approach: ! 
How h:it thou light ned even my very Soul, 
And let 1n Knowledge by another ſenſe! 

I vazc about, new-born, to Day anu thee ; 

A Strativer yet, an Infact of the World ! 

Art thou nog-pleas'd, A7ati/da ? Why, like me, 
Dot tho!1 not look and wonder ? 

Mat. For thele Sights 
Are to my Eyes familiar. 

Em, That's my joy, 

Not to havefecn betore : For Nature now, 
Comes all ar once, confounding my Delizht. 
But ali! what  hing am 1? Fain wou'd 1 know ; 
Or ata 1 blind, or do 1 ſee but halt? 

Witlz al] my Care, and looking round about, 

[ cannot V ew my lace. 

A!::. None ſec themſelves 
Bur ty Rellection ; in. this Glaſs you may, Gives her a Gl:{s. 
Em taking « this? 


' 


it holds a Face within 1t : Oh ſweet Face ; 


Fq Ul ys 4nHida 
Dok rain, [Ir draws the Mouth ,and Smiles and looks upon 
A! 3 but yct I cannot licar it Speak : (me ; 
I! proetiy thing 18 Dumb. 

Ml et, The Pretty thing 
You lee within the Glaſs, 1s you. 
Fm. What, AmlI two? Is this another me? 


Indecd it wears my Cloaths, has Hands like mine ; 


Atl \ochs what cr 1 do; but thar Pm ſure 


{ am a Maid, I'd {wear it were my Child. Matiloa £04 7. 


Look my Mat 4r;, We both arc in the Glats, 
Ob, now 1 know it plain ; they arc our Names 


That peep upon vs there, 
* 


Fey 


liz. Uir Sliadaws, Air, 


eee 


"rp 


” w—_—— — 


g—_— — Cc c—u—TCCCO —P— U—C—C—C EE 


oY ” . 


Emm. Mine is a prettier Shaddow far, then thine. 
I Love it ; let me kiſs my to'ther Sel. K'//ing the Glaſs, 
Alas,I've kifgd ir D 4d; the fine Thing” $gone 5 ( and bagging 1 tt. 
: Indeed it Kifs'd fo Co! d, as it 'twere Dying, 
Arthur comes forward ſoftly ; ſhcwing Timelf b<hind her. 
'Tis here again. 
Oh no, this Face is neither mine nor thine ; 

I think the Glats has Born another Cluld. She turns art 
Ha What art thou with a new kind of Face, (fees Ariliur. 
And other Cloaths, a Noublc Creature too ; 

But taller, bigger, ficrcer in thy Luok 
Ot a Comptrolling : Eye, Maj-(tick make? 
Mit. Do you not know hun, Madam ? 
Emm. 1St a Man? 
Arth. Yes, And the moſt unhappy of wy ing, 
It you have chang'd your Love. 
mm. My dearcit Lord ! 
Was my Soul Blind; and cou-d not that look Out 
Te know you, e're you Spouxe? Oh Cour tcrpart 
Of our loft S:x ; Well are ye made our Lords ; 
| So bold, fo grear, lo Godhke are yeftorm'd. 
F How can ye Love.luch li:ly Things as Women ? 
; Arth. Beatity like yours Commands ; and Mia was made 
Bur a more boiſterous ; and a ſtronger Slave, 
To you, the belt Deiiohts of human Kind. 
Emm. But are ye niine? Is there an end of War 
; Arc all thofe Trumnets Dead themkelvey, at lalt, 
That us'd to kill Men with their. Thundring Sounds ? 
Arth The Sum of Waris undecided ver ; 
Anu. 11y a breathing Body muſt be Cotd, 
Eres u are tice, 
E » 1. i low came ye hither then ? 
A th. B, M-az#'s Art, to {natclra ſhort liv'd Blils ; 
To fec'! my } ariſh'd Love upon your Eycs, 
One Moment, and depai T. 
Emm. O ' Oment, w Orthi— 
\%, hole Ages paſt, and all that are to come / 
Let L- ve-lic k 0/w4'4,.naw, unpiticd mourn 3 
Let O/mrond mutter Charms to oprights 11 vain, 


0 To make me Love him; all-ſh: not change wy >orfl,) 
2 A +. 


ik 


+ 
os = 


| 20 We 5 *U e 
| . Hz! Does the Tachaater ice Hell 70u ? 
| oO rein Hel yen Fre 


For whea he my ſhut Eyes I ſaw him; 
His Voice wrogety breath'd Brimitone on me : 
| And then I firſt was glad that I was Blind, 


Not to behold Damnation. 
Phil. This time is left me to Congratulate 
Your new-born Eyes ; and rel! you what you gain 
* By fight — and viewing him you - Fare _ 
| Appear, you Airy Forms. At its appear in t 
j a (Shapes Mew ted Women. 


jk * Manſings. Oh Sight, the Mother of Deſires, 

ls What Charning ObjeS: deft thou yield! 

l "Tis fweet, when tedious Night expires, 

To fee the Roſte Morning guild 

| e Mountain-Tops, and paint the Field ! 

if But, when Clorigda comes im fight, | 

She makes the Summers Day more bright ; 
And when' fbe yots away, "tis Night. © 

Chor. When Fair Clorinda contes in fight, &c. 


Wom.fings. 'Ti ſweet the BluſBing Mora to wew ; 
ed Plains adors'd cory ya Dew : 
But ſuch cheap Delights ts ſee, 

Heaven and Nature, 

Give cach Creature ; 

© They have Eyer, ac well ac we. 

This # the Toy, «lf Toys above, 
To ſee, wo ſee, 
Ther only 


That only fbe wo love! 


i Chor. "Brie is the Joy, all Toys above, bc. 


Late - 


Man And, if we may diſcover, 
—_— Charms'both Nymph and Lover, 
Tis, when the Fair at Mercy lies, 
With Kind _ Amorons Anguiſh, 
To Siab. to , to Langu 
ys others Eyes 1 © 


= 3 } Aud if we may diſcover, 8c. 


Phil, Break off your Muſick ;. for our Foes are near. 
| Spirits vaniſh. 
Emter Merlit.'' 


Merl. My Soveraign, we have hazarded too far; 
But Love excuſes you, and preſcience me. 
Make hafte ;, for O/mozd is even now alarm'd, 
And greedy of Revenge, is haſting bome: 
Arth. Oh take my Love with us, or leave me here: 
Merl. I cannot, for fhe's held by Charms too ſtrong : 
Which, with th” Inchanted Grove muſt be deſtroy'd ; 
Till when, my Art is vaiq: But fearnot, Emmeline ; 
Thy/Enchanter has no Pow'r on Innocence. 
to 4b. Farewet Since we muſt part: When you are gone, 
Pl! look into my Glaſs, juſt where you: Ibok'd; 
To fiad your Face again ; 
If 'ris not there, I'll think on you & long; 
My Heart ſhall make your PiQture for wy Eyes. | 
Arrh. Where-c'er I go, my Soul ſtall ſtay wikithee: 
"Tis but my Shadow that & rake away 
Frue Love is never happy bur by halves; 
An April Sun-fhine, that by firs appears, 
Ik {@iles by Moments, but it mourns by Years.- 


Exeunt Arthur and Merlin-«t-owe Dor. 


F ter 


8 NAT TRA | ge » UT, 

Arth, Ha! Does the Tachanter praftice Hell you? 
b be hy Rival too? . | mr 
Emm. es, but I hate him; 


For whea be ——— es I ſaw him; 
Ais Voice wropety breath'd Brumſtone on me : 


And then I firſt was glad that I was Blind, 
Not to behold Damnarion. 
Phil. This time is left me to Coogratulate 
You new*born Eyes ; and rel] you what you gain 
By ſight _— and viewing him you =_ | Fe 
Appear, you Airy Forms. Airy Spirits apptar in t 
TY T (Shapes Few 2d Women. 


* Man ſings. 0h Sight, the Mother of Deſires, 


What Charming Obje&: doſt thou yield! 
"Tis ſweet, when tedious Night expires, 
To fe the Roſte Morning guild 
e Mountain-Tops, and paint the Field | 

But, when Clorigda comes i ſight, | 

She makes the Summers Day more bright ; 

And when fbe gots away, "tis Niobt. © 
Chor. When Fair Clorinda comes m fight, &c. 


Wom.fings. *'T#- the Bluſbing Mora tb view ; 

pu oy adorn'd cry Sour Dew : 

But ſuch ebeap Delights to ſee, 

Heaven and Nature, 
Give each Creature ; 
' =" They have Eyer, a well as we. 
This # the Toy, ell Toys above, 
To ſee, v ſee, 

only 


That only fbe we love! 
Cher. "This is the Joy, alt Joys above, &c. 


F , . 


Man And, if we may diſcover, Q 
_ Charms both Nymph and Lover, 
'Tis, when the Fair at Mercy lies, 
With Kind and Amorons Anguiſb, 


On each-others Eyes ! 


. of all - hy 
=_ An 3p And if we may diſcover, 8c. 


Phil, Break off your Muſicle ;. for our Foes are near. 
$pirits vaniſh. 


Enter Merlin.' | 


Merl. My Soveraign, we have hazarded too far ; 
But Love excuſes you, and preſcience me. 
Make hafte ;, for O/moxd is GUIs alarm'd, 
And greedy of Revenge, is hafting home: 
Arth. Oh take my ove with us, or leave ine here: 
Merl. I cannot, for fhe's held by Charms too ſtrong : 
Which, with th” Inchanted Grove muſt be deftroy'd ; 
Till when, my Art is vain: But fear not, Emmeline; 
Th Enchanter has no Pow'r of Innocence. 
Em.to 1h. Farewel Since we muſt part: When you are gone, 
Fl look into my Glaſs, juft where you Ibok'd;; 
To fiad your Face again ; 
If "ris not there, Fl think on you & long, 
My Heart ſhall make your Pi for wy Eyes. * 
Arth. Where-c'er I go, my Soul ſtall ſtay wikktheet: 
"Tis but my Shadow that & rake away ; 
Frue Love is never happy bur by halves; 
An April Sun-ſhine, that by fits appears, 
k {les by Moments, but it mourns by Years.- 


Exennt Arthur aud Merlin-«t ove Dzor. 
A E tre 


, 4bi T 
Thi Foe to'l1 
i Foe Too i; NG: Mor Magician 


Emm. It cannot Toe wk $he'$tounliketbeden [ Lov C. 


Oſm. «ice. Death to my, ;bdces} - rr 

Emm. | wilh 1 cou'd not ; But Pl nor is) Siohe, 
And ſhu: out all I can —— It wo'not bs; 11.7, ..{71 
Winking, LHeg thee fill; cby odfous in Ea 
Stares full into my Soul ; and there infe the Room 
My Arthar ſhou' poſfel 

Oſmi. aſia. 4 fd £66 _ 

Thas 81:+lingnd her 20m have been Da 
If 1 was fir'4 before, when ſhe was Blind, 
Her Eyes dart Lightning;now, {he-muſt be mine. 

Emm. 1 prithee Dreadfu Thing, tell me thy Buſineſs htre ; 
And it thou \can(t;, Reform that odious Face; .,-, + 
Look not fo Grim YP9rD _ M1 \ Soo 

O/m. My Naw Yano and my BuſineGLove...; ef : 

Emm, Thouka Tochiddion wha hattheu poke, 
i 1 dunk elephe 2'1 ——_OET. Ab 

Ofmrer or Ta | mp =, hed 


_ t. G 
ou vb fa gr Logc _ 
cr here. 


No Coineſs, me 998 ay l am | 4 a 
Enm. And w he 4 "Oy 7K, aw: oor i 5 
leg Þ Sis 14 4£ht 
old wat t fy ive 40 Tl | al” 


1hat thou 5 

_— 

o labour'd with, aþe MEA, OPpreit 1 

That Oſwali oro nenren d call'd Fas Ne 

I mix'd a SICEPPY lun lus Bow!.; ” " 

—_ he and Os £00k Friend, quaf*d £2 —_ 
The Nap Doſe'wraumhe the'defit'd IP 


T!1cn ro a Lungeons depth, I ſent both Bouad : 


Wherc 


Whate wy es << \ todge ;- ge 
Two Plea] ig I ie b Mp Slime : 

The RY ; WR Ooh 20 $5 

And ockin Paddocks crawl upon their —_—_ 


Since when the'Garifan; PETER (7, 
— ka Be Gries Wy \t No OTA 


6&2 1 rrour roi 
Bt Gt Me But "as 1 Nis R's Chad td 
My Feet eg B&ith, 1302 MH om AJ 


On, "Bt Lovgihall thaw 
JR cale4.wich 1 uy le, 


PI! how this: forge ia. Cunt 
Where the pals, Polg- -Star 4n *N vn 
* bb 


Sits high, op the fro Winter 
& theee Love G\ehb Wand. 
Shall change the Miidaef: of {weet ay lime 


To I-«l:nd, apache. Lars " wy 
WF: in Wha Bounds, 108, 


Where the IE 
O'er:le AG $ the mA f Frertfl Snow, 


And with hls Wartnth, — _—— Sap. 


Oſmond ſtrikes th G Gy path +4 Wand : The Scene 
bang x sf 4 Proſpect in Frozen Countries.. 


FINeeY AY \P, 4 


Ti C yea Deſcend's. 


\ Yi op 


pgs Wharbogthas Gariulef the Chime, what hol! 
Fr, ﬀ}# thoa- aſlzepbeneath thoſe. Hitls of Snow ® 
 Strereb out thy. Limbs,;\ 4make, awake, 
And wi inter 7 from thy F arry Mantle wy 


< . : W b. | 


Genigs Arifes. 


Cenius. V/hbat Power art thou, who from below, 
Haſt made me Riſe, unvillingly, and ſlow, 
From Beds of Ewerlaſting Snow |} 
See'ſt thou pot bow ſtiff," and wondrons ol), 
Far wiſe. to beav | the iter "old, 


—_ __ 
i l 


” + 34 


"48 + * 


o = e = x PX 


o 
OS” : 
6,4 a V5: 3» $70 
«x « ws ” 
# 1 -# o 
4 Ly 


j > # 
| r 
4 oh» 
= %*® *.,* 3 
+ 


$ 


* > wY 
| 
| OOH 


WIE 9%. Gy 
Paadh- 1d 


n "ER RENE 
— #4 + WF ——C 
IE LEY 
43 i _ 

$7 


- "T2 nat - 
, . © a 4, 4g Py 
- 7p. 3 

tr 


Thar 81 +4mn we her Lover have been here. 


5 : — 


Enter Olmond at the ther Noor nbo $4483 on Emmeline, ? *% 
_— $2 00 b1ms,.. 


[rms Mauidaa, ſave; me, tram this, voly Thing, 


This | Oe t0 ſight, Speak, doſt chou Know tim : 


M. 2:1. Too w &; 'nsOfralPs Friend, therreat Magician 
{:-m. It cannot be a Man, he's fo anlike the Man 1 1.01 
"— - cath ro my Eyes, ſhe {ces! 
{rm | wilh 1 cou'd not ; _= PII clole my Sight, 

And il u- out all I can — It wo'not bs ; . 

Winking, I ſee thee ſtill, thy odious image 

"tarcs till into my Soul ; and there infects the Room 

Ny Arth: 7  thou'd poſſeſs, 
O/m. aſiie. } find roo late, 


Ii ] was fir] before, when ſhe was Blind, 
Her ves dart Lightning now, ſhe muſt be mine. 
#1944. 1 prithee Dreadtul Thing, tell me thy Buſine's here 4 
And ir thou canit, Retorm that odious Face ; 
Loolk nut fo Grim upgn me. 
0/12, My Natwe:is O/mond,. and my Buſineſs Love. . . 9 
{1, Thou haſt agriczly look ; forbidding w hat thou askt, / 
Ii 1 durdt tcll-thes {o, 
O/-. My PenteHoute Eye-Brows, end my Shaggy Beard 
Otend your Sight, tutahelec.are Manly Signs; 
I aint White and Red, abut. your ExpeCtations 5 ; 
Be Woman ; kraw your. $cx, and Love full Plcaſurcs. 
Emm. Love from a Moallcr, Ficnd ! 
O/m. C ome you mult Love, or you muſt ſur Loyc : 5 
No Coinc%, None, for I am Maſtcr here. 
Enm. And when did 0/wild give away his Power, 
an thou prefum'l},to Rules ?. B: ſure 111 ach Mo 
r ag ru bys Peifoner, he is manc. 
©0f ». hy then thou art a Captive to a Cant UNC, 
O'cr labour'd with the Fight, oppre:t wigh Lhiclt ; ; 
That 0/--:1i whom you mention « call'd tor rink : 
I mix' a Sicepy/Potion in his Bow!.; ' 
Winch he and his Fool Friend, quait' d greedily , 
The Hxppu-Doſe wrought the defir'd eticft ; 
T':c:1 tro a Lrungeons depth, I ſent both Bouad : 


Wherc 


OO — 


—_— >. - 


- a 1 
Where ſtow'd with Spgkes.agd ,\dders now they lodoe - J 
Two Plaaks their Beds ; Stipgery with Oofe and Slime : 
The Ratts bruſh ofer:thitir Faces with” their Tail- : 
And croaking Vaddocks craw! upon their Limbs. 
Since when the Garjlen dencnigon me z 
Now know you are my Slave...'. 
Mat. He ſtrikes a korrour through my Blood. 
Pom. I Freeze, as if Nis woptous Art had 1\x'd 
My Feet to Earth, +4? 154 | | 
Of, But Love thall thaw ye. | 
1! ſhow 11s force i2 Cauntries cak'd. with Ice, 
Where the.pale Polg-Star in the North of Heay*n 
Sits high, 2nd on the frory Winter broods'; © 
Yct there Love Reigns : For proot, this Magich Wan. 
Shall change the Mildaefs of {weet Brita:»s Clime 
To T::1::d, apdachc tarthgit 15p/t's Froſt ; 
Where the proud God, diſdaiting Winters Bounds; 
O*cr-leaps the Fences of Eternal Snow, 
And wah his Warmth, ſupplies the diſtant Son. 


Oſmond ſtrikes tb» Ground with bis Wand: The Scene 
changes 80 4 Preſp. > of inter in Frozin Countries, 


C 0! P id D<[cend's. 


Cup. ſ1ngs. What bo, than Geruus of the Cline. wht by 


Ly ft thou aſleep: beneath thoſe. Hills of Snow ® 
Stretch out thy Lazy Limbs ; Awake, awake, 
And Winter from thy Furry Mantle ſhake. 


Cenrys Ariſes. 


Genius. VVhat Power art thou, who from belnw, 
Haſt made me Riſe, unwillingly, and ſlow, 
From Beds of 6 wverlaſt ing Snow ! 
See'ſt thou net how fiiff, and wondrons 0l1, 
Far nnfit 10 bear the bitter Cold, 
; | : 


——— _—__ — 
4A 


= can ſcarcely move, or draw my Breath; '' 
+ . Let me, let nee; Freeze again to Death. 


Cupid. Thou Doting Fool, forbear, forbeer, 
VVhat, Doft tho Pream of Freezing here ? 
A Laves appearing, all the Skie rleoring, 
The Stormy VVinds their Fury ſpare : 
V/Vinter ſubduing, and Spring renewing, 
Beams create 4 more Glorions ear. 
Thog, Doting Fool, forbear, forbear ; 
FF bat, Doft thou Dream of Freezing bere ? 


Geaius. Great Love, 1 know thte now; 
Eldeſt of the Gods art Thos : 
Heawv'n and Earth, by Thee were made. 
Humane Nature, 
- It Thy Greature, © 
Every where Thou art obey'd. 


Cupid. No part of my Dominion ſhall be waſte, 
£10 To fproud tvy Sway, and\fing my, Praiſe, 
Ev" here 1 will a People raiſe, 


Of kind embrating Lovers, and embrac'd. 


Cupid waves his Wand, Pr which the Scene opens, and 
0 


diſcovers « Proſpef® of Ice and Snow to the enll of the 


Sage. 


- 


Singers and Daxnc.rs, Men and W omen, appears. 


Man. See, ſee, we aſſemble, 
1 Revels to bold : 
Though quiv' ring with Cold, © 
Ie Chatter and Tremble. Cupid. 


F 


- 


Cupid. Tis TI, tw 1, 'tis I, that have warn'd Je; 
In ſpight of Cold Weather, 
I've brought ye together ; 
Til, "tis I, ts I, that have arm'd ye. 


Chor. 'Tis Love, tis Love,'tis Love that bas warm'd 11s; 
In ſpight of Cold Weather, 
He brought us together : 
"Tis Love, "tis Love, 'tis Love that has arm'd us. 


Cupid. Sound a Parley, ye Fair, and ſurrender; 
Set your ſelves, -and your Lowers at eaſe ; 
He's a Grateful Offender 
IW bo Pleaſure dare ſeize : 
But the Whining Pretender 
Is ſure to diſpleaſe. 


2, 


Since the Fruit of Deſire is poſſeſſinx, 
'Tis Unmanly to Sigh and C omplann 3 
VVhen we K neel for Redreſſing, 
VVe move your Diſdain : 
Love was made for a Bleſſing, 


And not for a Pain. 


t 


A Dances, after which the Singers and Dancers dcpart, 


on. , 


Emm, 1 cou'd be plcay'd with any one but thec, 
Who enterrain'd my &ght with ſuch * Gay Shows, 
As Men and Women moving here and there 
That Courſing one another 1n their Steps, 

Have made their Feeta Tune, F 


a | 34 p _ o A o - 


Oſmo. What, Coying it again ! 
No more ; but make me happy to my Guſt, 
Thar is, without your ſtruggling. 
Emm, From my fight, - 
Thou all thy Devils 1a one, thou dar'ſt not force me. 
Oſmo. You teach me well, I find you wou'd be Raviſh'd; 
Pll give you that excuſe your Sex defires, 


He begins to lay hold on her, and they ſtruggle. 


Grimb. withiz, O help me, Maſter, help me! 

0/0. Who's that, my Grimba!d ! Come and help thou me : 
For *tis thy Work r'aflaſt a Raviſher. 

Grimb. within. I cannot ſtir ; I am Spell-caught by Philidel, 
And purs'd withina Net. With azhuge heavy weight of Holy 
Laid on my Head, that keeps medown from riſing (Words, 
' Ofmo. Vil read *em backwards, and releaſe thy Bonds : 
Mean time go in : — To Emmeline. 

Prepare your ſelf, and eaſe my Drudgery : 
But if you will not fairly be enjoy'd, 
A little honeſt Force, is well employ'd: Exit Oſmond. 
+» Emm, Heav'n be my Guard, I have no other Friend ! 
Heav'n ever preſent to thy Suppliants Aid, 
Protect and pity Innocence betray'd. / 

Exeunt Emmeline and Matilda, 


e Britiſh Worthy. 


/ 
_ 


ACT IV. SCENE I. , 


— 


Enter Oſmond Solus. 


Ow I am ſettled in my Force-full Sway; 
Why then, Il be Luxurious in my Love ; 
Take my full Guft, and ſetting Forms aſide, 
Pl! bid the Slave, that fires my Blood, lie down. 
Seems t0 be going of. 


Enter Grimbald, who meets him. 


Grim, Not ſo faſt, Maſter, Danger threatens thee : 
There's a black Cloud, deſcending from above, 
Full of Heavens Venom, burſting o'er thy Head. 

O/me. Malicious Fiend, thou ly*ſt: For I am fenc'd 
By Millions of thy Fellows, in my Grove : 
F bad thee, whenl freed thee from the: Charm, 
Run ſcouting through the Wood, from Tree to Tree, 
And look if all my Devils were on Duty : 
Hadſt thou perform'd thy Charge, thou tardy Spright, 
Thou wouldit have known no Danger threatn'd me. 

Grim. When did a Devil fail in Diligence? 

Poor Mortal, thou thy ſelf art overicen ; 
I have been there, and thence I bring this News. 
Thy Fatal Foe, great Arthur, 1s at hand ; 
Ms:rlin has ta*cn his time while thou wert abſent, 
T* obſerve thy Charatters, their Force, and Nature, 
And Counterwork thy Spe!ls. 

O/mo. The Devil take Merlin ; 
Pll caſt 'em all anew, and 1aſtantly, 
All of another Mould ; be thou at hand, 
Their Compoſition was, before, of Hotror ; 
Now they ſhall be of Blandiſhment, and Lov-; 


F 2 Seducino 


LF 


3 


34 
Oſmo. What, Coying it again ! 
No more ; but make me happy to my Guſt, 
Thar is, without your ſtruggling. 
Emm, From my ſight, , 
Thou a!l thy Devils 1a one, thou dar'ſt not force me. 
Oſmo. You teach me well, I find you wou'd be Raviſh'd; 
Pll give you that excuſe your Sex defires. 


He begins to lay hold on her, and they ſtruggle. 


Grimb. withiz, O help me, Maſter, help me! 
O/-0. Who's that, my Grimbald ! Come and help thou me : 
For *tis thy Work raflaſt a Raviſher. 
; Grimb. within. I cannot ſtir ; I am Spell-caught by Philiael, 
| And purs'd within a Net. With a»huge heavy weight of Holy 
Laid on my Head, that keeps medown from riſing (Words, 
 Ofmo. Vil read *em backwards, and releaſe thy Bonds : 
Mean time go in : — To Emmeline. 
Prepare your ſelf, and eaſe my Drudgery : 
But if you will not fairly-be enjoy'd, 
A little honeſt Force, is well employ'd: Exit Oſmond. 
+» Emm, Heav'n be my Guard, I have no other Friend |! 
Heay'n ever preſent to thy Suppliants Aid, 
Protech and pity Innocence betray'd. / 
Exeunt Emmeline and Matilda, 


e Britiſh Worthy. 


ACT IV, SCENE TI 


Enter Oſmond Solus, 


Ow I am ſettled in my Forcesfull Sway 
Why then, Ill be Luxurious in my Love ; 
Take my full Guft, and fetting Forms aſide, 
Pl! bid the Slave, that fires my Blood, lie down. 
Seems 80 be going of. 


Enter Grimbald, who meets hin, 


Grim, Not fo faſt, Maſter, Danger threatens thee : 
There's a black Cloud, deſcending from above, . 
Full of Heavens Venom, burſting o'er thy Head. 
. O/me. Malicious Fiend, thou ly*{t: For I am fenc'd 
By Millions of thy Fellows, 1n my Grove : 
F bad thee, whenl freed thee from the Charm, 
Run ſcouting through the Wood, from Tree to Tree, 
And look if all my Devils were on Duty: 
Hadſt thou perform'd thy Charge, thou tardy Spright, 
Thou wouldit have known no Danger threatn'd me. 
| Grim. When did a Devil fail in Diligence ? 
Poor Mortal, thou thy ſelf art overicen ; 
I have been there, and thence TI bring this News. 
Thy Fatal Foe, great Arthur, is at hand ; 
Merlin has ta'en his time while thou wert abſent, 
T' obſerve thy CharaGters, their Force, and Nature, 
And Counterwork thy Spells. 
O/mo. The Devil take Meri» ; 
Pll caſt 'em all anew, and 1aſtantly, 
All of another Mould ; be thou at hand, 
Their Compolition was, before, of Hotror ; 
Now they ſhall be of Rot»: and Lov: ; 
| 2 


Seducino 


6 King ARTHUR: Or, 
Seducing Hopes, ſoft Pity, tender Moans : ; 
Art ſhall meet Art ; and, whea they think to win, 


The Fools ſhall find their Labour to begin. 
Exeunt Oſrma. 4nd Grimb. 


Exter Arthur, aud Merlin at another Doop. 


Scene of the Wood continues, 


Aer!. Thus far it is permitted me to go ; 
Bur all beyond this Spor, is fenc'd with Charms 
[ may no more ; but only with advice. 
Arth, My Sword ſhall do the reſt. 
\erl. Remember well, that all is but Iuſion; 
Goon; good Stars attend thee. 
£Arth. Doubt me not. 
M-rl. Yet in prevention 
Of what may come, Ill leave my Pb/lide! 
To watch thy Steps, and with him leave my Wand ; 
The touch of which, ne Earthy Fiend can bear, 
ln whate'er Shape transform'd, but muit lay down 
His borrow'd Figure, and confeſs the Devil. 
Once more Farewel, and proſper. Exit Merlins 
Arth. walkinz, No Danger yet, I ſee no Walls of Fire, 
No City 6f the Fiends, with Forms obſcene, 
To grin from far, on Flaming Battlements. 
This 1sindeed the Grove I ſhou'd deſtroy ; 
Put where's the Horrour ? Sure the Prophet err'd. 
Hark! Mukick, and the warbling Notes of Birds 3 
Soft Muſick, 
{fH-!| entertains me, like ſome welcom Gueſt. 
More Wonders yet ; yet all delightful too, 
A Si:ver Current to forbid my paſſage, 
And yet to invite me, ſtands a Golden Bridge : 
Ferhaps a Trap, for my Unwary Feet 
70 ink, ani! whelm me underneath the Waves ; 
W::h Fire or Water, let him wage his V Var, 
Dr al! the E'emcnrs at once; VI! on. 
AS 0 &r porno to the Bridoe, tro Syrcns 
Water; Thy ſheer themſelves; 


The Britiſh Warthy. 
x Syren. O paſs not on, but ſlay, 
And waſte the Toyous Day 
VVith us in gentle Play: 
Unbend to Lowe, unbend thee : 
0 lay thy Sword aſide, 
And other Arms provide; 


For other Wars attend thee, 
And ſweeter to be try'd. 


Chor. For other Wars, &c. 


Both ſing. Two Daughters of this Aged Stream are we z 
And both our Sea-oreen Locks hawe comb'd for 
Come Bathe with us an Hour or tws, (thee, 
Come Naked in, for weare fo ; 
What Danger from a Naked Foe 
Come Bathe with us, come Bathe, and ſhare,, 
VVhat Pleaſures in the Floods appear ; 
We'll beat the Waters till they bound, 


And Circle; round, around, around, 
And Circle round, around. 


Arth. A Lazie Pleaſure trickles through my Veins 
Here cou'dI ſtay, and well be Couzen'd here. 
But Honour calls; Is Honour in ſuch halte ? 
Can henot Bait at ſuch a pleaſing Inn? 
No: for the more T look, the more I long ; 
Farewe!, ye Fair Illulfons, I'mult leave ye, 
While I have Power to ſay, that 1 mult Icave yo 
Farewel, with half my Soul I ſtagger oft ; 
H-w dear this flying Victory has colt, 
When, it I ſtay to ſtruggle, lamlolt, 

As he ts coing forward, Nymplis and Sylvans ce cut 


{rom behind the Trees. Baſe and two Trebles ſing 
the following Song to a Mi:uct, 


> King ARTHUR: Or, 
Dante nith the Song, allwith Branches in their Hands, 
Song. How bappy the Lover, 


How eafie bis Chain, 
How pleaſing bis Pain £ 
How ſweet to diſcower ! 
He ſighs not in vain. 
For Love every Creature 
ls form'd by bus Nature ; 
No Joys afe above 
The Pleaſures of Love. 


The Dance cont inues with the ſame Meaſure play'd alone. 


2. 


In vain are otr Graces, 
In wain are your Eyes, 


If Lowe you deſpiſe ; 
When Age furrows Faces, 
"Tus time to be wiſe. 
Then uſe the ſhort Bleſſing, 
That Flies in Poſſeſſing : 
No Toys are above 
The Pleaſures of Love. 


; | 
Arth. And what are theſe Fantaſtick Fairy Joys, 

To Love like mine? Falſe Joys, falſe Welcomes all. 

Bzgone, ye Sy/van 7Tippers of the Green 

FI y aſter Night, and overtake the Moon. Here the Dancers, 

(Singers and Syrens vaniſÞ. 

This goodly Tree ſeems Queen of all the Grove. 

T he Ringlets round her Trunk declare her guilty 

Of many Midnight-Sabbaths Revell here.. , 

Her will I firſt attempt. Arthur ftrikes at th: Tree, ad cuts 


it ; Blood ſpouts out of it, a Groan follow;, tle a Shreik, 
j Good Heiv'ns, what Monſtrous Prodigies are the ! 


Cn em. em 


— 


Blood follows from my blow 3 the wounded Rind 
Spouts on = Sword, and Sanguine dyes the Plain. 

; ? ftrikes again; A Voue of Eqmmeline rom behind. 
Em. from behind. Forbear, if thou halt Pity, ah, forbeac ! 

Theſe Groans proceed not from a Sencelefs Plant, 

No Spouts of Blood run welling irom a Tree, 
Arth. Speak what thoy art; I charge thee ſpeak thy Being ; 

Thou that haſt made my curdl'd Blood run back, 

My Heart heave up ; my Hairto riſe in Briſtles, 

And ſcarcely leit a Voice to ask thy Name. 

Emmeline breats out of the Tree 
ſhewing her Arm Bl1ody, 

Emm. Whom thou haſt hurt,-Unkind and Cruel (ee; 

Look on this Blood, *cis fatal, itill, ro me 

To bear thy Wounds, my Heart has fe!t *em firſt, 
Arth, *'Tis ſhe ; Amazement roots me to the Groun!! 
Emm. By cruel Charms, dragg'd from my pcacciul Bower, 

Fierce Oſmond clols'd me in this bleeding Bark ; 

And bid me ſtand expos'd to the bleak Winds, 

And Winter Storms ; and Heav'ns Inclemency,, - 

Bound to the Fare of this Hell-haunted Grove; 

So that whatever Sword, or ſounding Axe, 

Shall violate this Plant, muſt pierce my Fleſh, 

And when that falls, I dye. 
Arth. 1f this be true, 

O never, never, to be ended Charm, 

At leaſt by me yet all may be liluſin. 

Break up, ye thickning Foggs, and tilmy Miſts, 

All that be-lye my Sight, and'cheat my vei le. 

For Reaſon ſtill pronounces, "tis not ſhe, 

An1 thus refolv'd--- Lifts up 115 yvord,as gnung 89 ſtrik?;, 
Emm, Do, ſtrike Birbarian, (trike ; 

And ſtrew my mang'd Limbs, with every ſtroke 

Wound me, and donb!e ix.ill me, with Unkindnels, 

That by thy Hand I {cll. 
Arth. What ſh:!l I do,*ye Powers? 
Fmm. Liy down thy Vengetul Sword "Us fatal here? 

What need of Arms, whereno Defence 15 made ? 

A Love-Sick Virgin, panting with Deſire 

No Coalcious Eye t'intrude on our Del'ghts: 


- 


For this thou haſt the Syren's Songs deſiis'd 3 
For this, thy Faithful Paſſion I Reward; 
Haſte then, to take me longing to. thy Arms. - 
Arth. O Lovel O M-r{:n) Whom ſhould I believe? , 
Emm. Believe thy Seif, thy You:h, thy Love, and me; 
They only, they, who pleaſe theri{clves are Wile : 
Difarm thy Hand, that mine may meet it bare. 
Arth. By thy leave, Reaſon, here I throw thee off, 
Thou load of Life: If thou wert made for Souls, 
Then Souls ſhou'd have been made without their Bodies. 
If, falling for the firſt Created Fair, 
Was Adam's Fault, great Grandlire I forgive thee, 
Eien was loſt, as all thy Soas wou'd loole it. 
Going towards Emntline, and pulling off his Gantlet, 


Enter Phiilidel running. 


P/i. Hold, poor deluded Mortal, hold thy Hand; 
\Which if thou giv'ſty is plighted to a Feind, 
For Proof, behold the Virtue of this Wand ; * 
1t” Internal Paint ſhall variiſh from her Face, 
And Hell ſhall mand Reveal'd. - 
Strikes Emmeline with a Wand, who freight 
& ſcends : Philidel runs to the Deſcent,and 
pulls ip Grimbald, and binds him. 


Now ſee to whoſe Embraces thou wert falling. 
Bchold the Maiden' Modeſty of Grimbald, 
Tie groſſ:ſt, carthie(t, uglieſt Ficnd in Hell, 
Arth. Horrour ſeizes me, 
7o think what Head!ong Ruine I have tempted. 
Phil. Haſte fo thy Work 3 a Noble ſtroke or two 
Ends all the Charms, and diſeachants the Grove. 
I'll ho!d thy Miſtreſs bound, 
Arth. Then here's for Earneſt 
Strikes twice or thrice, and the Tree falls, or finks 
A Peal bots immediately follows, with 
dreadful Howl:nge.,. 


h 
113 *Tis finiſh'd, andthe Dusk that yet.remains,
