Requested Title: LA W AGAINST LOVERS
Authors: Sir William Davenant
Matched Alias: The Law against Lovers
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1475-1640_the-works-of-sr-william-_davenant-sir-william_1673
Source Title: The works of Sr William Davenant Kt... 1673
Source Author: Davenant, Sir William.
Source Date: 1673
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/davenant_works_1673_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from Davenant's collected works searchtext with a stable title line and bounded ending before The Man's the Master.

---
Law againft Lovers. :
[ wore, when baldly to my face you did Traduce me 1a this Priſon. |
Luc. If your Highneſs, forgiving now ſo many, Will pardon me too, ['l] hereafter hang A Padlock at my lips, and this good Father Shall keep the Key of it.
Duke. Your (landers, Lucio, cannot do me harm. Be ſorrowful, and be forgiven.
Balt. Thy Mother hath bewitcht thee the right way, For no Sword can pierce thee. -
Duke. Think me not ſingular, becauſe I did my ſelf a while depoſe;
For many Monarchs have their Thrones Forſaken for a Cloiſtral lifez and I, Perhaps, may really that Habit take, Which I have worn but 1n diſguiſe.
Ang. That were t'undo the world by leaving it. Ber. Whillt ſo you ſeek imagin'd happineſs, We all ſhall find eſſential miſery.
Duke. My reſolutions are not ſoon remov'd: I'm old and weary of authority. | But, ere [ leave it quite (lince I have no Succeſlors of my own) let me diſpoſe Of beſt advantages to thof,, whom I Eſteem, who may enjoy my pow'r. Lend me, Chaſlt 7abella, your fair hand; which with '
Your heart I dedicate to Angelo He now ſufficiently that virtue knows, Which he too much, too curiouſly has try d.
Tſav. I have ſo long your counſel follow'd with Succeſs, as I am taught not to ſuſpect Much happineſs will ſtill attead Th obedience which does yield To your command. |
Avg. I fear my joys are grown too great to laſt.
Duke. I have a good occaſion, Benedich,,
To thank you now for your ſucceſsful toils And Victory in the AMillain Wars for which, In ample recompence, I give you but The heart, which I perceive you had before. The witty war which you ſo long have had With virtuous Be'trice, now muſt gently end, In joyful triumphs of a nuptial peace. +
Beat. Take heed! our quarrel will begin again; And th' end of this long Treaty will but bring The war home to your own doors.
Ben, I'll venture, *Tis but providing good ſtore of Cradles for Barracadoes to line my Chamber.
Duke. Be happy, Claudio, in "- faithful Julzer,
The perſecutions of your loves We paſt. Claud. They feel not joy who have not ſorrow felt. We through affliftions make our way to Heaven. Luc. Fool, I've a mind to marry your Grandmother. Fool. She ſtays for you in the Church, and will prove
A ſweet Bed-fellow, for ſhe has not been Bury'd above a Month. = |
o
Dwke. Provoſt, open your. Priſon-Gategj'and make
Your Pris'ners free. The ſtory of this days When *'tis to future Ages told, will ſeem A moral drawn from a poetick Dream.
FINIS.
