Canonical Title: LOVE LIES A BLEEDING
Requested Title: LOVE LIES A BLEEDING
Authors: Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: philasterorlovel00beau
Item Title: Philaster : or, Love lies a-bleeding
Item Creator: Beaumont, Francis, 1584-1616 ; Fletcher, John, 1579-1625 ; Boas, Frederick S. (Frederick Samuel), 1862-1957
Item Year: 1898
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: LOVE LIES A BLEEDING
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/philasterorlovel00beau/philasterorlovel00beau_djvu.txt
PHILASTER 

OR 

LOVE    LIES    A-BLEEDING 

ACT   THE   FIRST 

SCENE  I 

The  Presence  Chamber  in  the  Palace. 

Enter  Dion,  Cleremont,  and  Thrasiline. 

Cle.  Here 's  nor  lords  nor  ladies. 

Dion.  Credit  me,  gentlemen,  1  wonder  at  it.  They 
received  strict  charge  from  the  King  to  attend  here: 
besides,  it  was  boldly  published,  that  no  officer 
should  forbid  any  gentleman  that  desired  to  attend 
and  hear. 

Cle,  Can  you  guess  the  cause  ? 

Dion.  Sir,  it  is  plain,  about  the  Spanish  Prince,  that 's 
come  to  marry  our  kingdom's  heir  and  be  our  sove- 
reign, lo 

TJira.  Many,  that  will  seem  to  know  much,  say  she 
looks  not  on  him  like  a  maid  in  love. 

Dion.  Faith,  sir,  the  multitude,  that  seldom  know  any- 
thing but  their  own  opinions,  speak  that  they  would 
A  I 


ACT  I.  sc.  X.  Philaster 

have ;  but  the  prince,  before  his  own  approach, 
received  so  many  confident  messages  from  the  state, 
that  I  think  she 's  resolved  to  be  ruled. 

Cle.  Sir,  it  is  thought,  with  her  he  shall  enjoy  both  these 
kingdoms  of  Sicily  and  Calabria.  19 

Dio7i.  Sir,  it  is  without  controversy  so  meant.  But  'twill 
be  a  troublesome  labour  for  him  to  enjoy  both  these 
kingdoms  with  safety,  the  right  heir  to  one  of  them 
living,  and  living  so  virtuously ;  especially,  the 
people  admiring  the  bravery  of  his  mind  and 
lamenting  his  injuries. 

Cle.  Who,  Philaster? 

Dion.  Yes  ;  whose  father,  we  all  know,  was  by  our  late 
King  of  Calabria  unrighteously  deposed  from  his  fruit- 
ful Sicily.  Myself  drew  some  blood  in  those  wars, 
which  I  would  give  my  hand  to  be  washed  from.  30 

Cle.  Sir,  my  ignorance  in  state-policy  will  not  let  me 
know  why,  Philaster  being  heir  to  one  of  these 
kingdoms,  the  King  should  suffer  him  to  walk 
abroad  with  such  free  liberty. 

Dion.  Sir,  it  seems  your  nature  is  more  constant  than 
to  inquire  after  state-news.  But  the  King,  of  late, 
made  a  hazard  of  both  the  kingdoms,  of  Sicily  and 
his  own,  with  offering  but  to  imprison  Philaster  ;  at 
which  the  city  was  in  arms,  not  to  be  charmed  down 
by  any  state-order  or  proclamation,  till  they  saw 
Philaster  ride  through  the  streets  pleased  and  with- 
out a  guard ;  at  which  they  threw  their  hats  and 

2 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  i. 

their  arms  from  them ;  some  to  make  bonfires, 
some  to  drink,  all  for  his  deliverance  :  which  wise 
men  say  is  the  cause  the  King  labours  to  bring  in 
the  power  of  a  foreign  nation  to  awe  his  own  with. 

Enter  Galatea^  a  Lady,  and  Megra. 

Thra.  See,  the  ladies  !     What 's  the  first  ? 

Dion.  A  wise  and  modest  gentlewoman  that  attends  the 
princess.  50 

Cle.  The  second  ? 

Dion.  She  is  one  that  may  stand  still  discreetly  enough, 
and  ill-favouredly  dance  her  measure  ;  simper  when 
she  is  courted  by  her  friend,  and  slight  her  hus- 
band. 

Cle.  The  last  .^ 

Dio7i.  Faith,  I  think  she  is  one  whom  the  state  keeps 
for  the  agents  of  our  confederate  princes ;  she  '11 
cog  and  lie  with  a  whole  army,  before  the  league 
shall  break.  Her  name  is  common  through  the 
kingdom,  and  the  trophies  of  her  dishonour  ad- 
vanced beyond  Hercules'  Pillars.  She  loves  to  try 
the  several  constitutions  of  men's  bodies ;  and, 
indeed,  has  destroyed  the  worth  of  her  own  body 
by  making  experiment  upon  it  for  the  good  of  the 
commonwealth. 

Cle.  She 's  a  profitable  member. 

Meg.  Peace,  if  you  love  me  :  you  shall  see  these  gentle- 
men stand  their  ground  and  not  court  us. 
3 


ACT  I.  sc.  r.  Philaster 

Gal.  What  if  they  should  ?  70 

La.  What  if  they  should  ! 

Meg.  Nay,  let  her  alone. — What  if  they  should  !  Why, 
if  they  should,  I  say  they  were  never  abroad  :  what 
foreigner  would  do  so  ?  it  writes  them  directly 
untravelled. 

Gal.  Why,  what  if  they  be  ? 

La.  What  if  they  be  ! 

Meg.  Good  madam,  let  her  go  on. — What  if  they  be ! 
Why,  if  they  be,  I  will  justify,  they  cannot  maintain 
discourse  with  a  judicious  lady,  nor  make  a  leg  nor 
say  'excuse  me.'  81 

Gal.  Ha,  ha,  ha  ! 

Meg.  Do  you  laugh,  madam  ? 

Dion.  Your  desires  upon  you,  ladies  ! 

Meg.  Then  you  must  sit  beside  us. 

Dion.  I  shall  sit  near  you  then,  lady. 

Meg.  Near  me,  perhaps  :  but  there's  a  lady  endures 
no  stranger  ;  and  to  me  you  appear  a  very  strange 
fellow. 

La.  Methinks  he's  not  so  strange  ;  he  would  quickly  be 
acquainted.  91 

Thru.  Peace,  the  King  ! 

Enter  Ki?ig,  Pharajuond^  Arefhusa,  and  Attendants. 

King.  To  give  a  stronger  testimony  of  love 
Than  sickly  promises  (which  commonly 
In  princes  find  both  birth  and  burial 

4 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  i. 

In  one  breath)  we  have  drawn  you,  worthy  sir, 
To  make  your  fair  endearments  to  our  daughter, 
And  worthy  services  known  to  our  subjects, 
Now  loved  and  wondered  at ;  next,  our  intent 
To  plant  you  deeply  our  immediate  heir  ico 

Both  to  our  blood  and  kingdoms.     For  this  lady 
(The  best  part  of  your  life,  as  you  confirm  me. 
And  I  believe),  though  her  few  years  and  sex 
Yet  teach  her  nothing  but  her  fears  and  blushes, 
Desires  without  desire,  discourse  and  knowledge 
Only  of  what  herself  is  to  herself, 
Make  her  feel   moderate   health  ;    and  when  she 

sleeps. 
In  making  no  ill  day,  knows  no  ill  dreams  : 
Think  not,  dear  sir,  these  undivided  parts, 
That  must  mould  up  a  virgin,  are  put  on  no 

To  show  her  so,  as  borrowed  ornaments, 
To  speak  her  perfect  love  to  you,  or  add 
An  artificial  shadow  to  her  nature — 
No,  sir  ; 

I  boldly  dare  proclaim  her  yet  no  woman. 
But  woo  her  still,  and  think  her  modesty 
A  sweeter  mistress  than  the  offered  language 
Of  any  dame,  were  she  a  queen,  whose  eye 
Speaks  common  loves  and  comforts  to  her  servants. 
Last,  noble  son  (for  so  I  now  must  call  you),         120 
What  I  have  done  thus  public,  is  not  only 
To  add  a  comfort  in  particular 
S 


ACT  I.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

To  you  or  me,  but  all ;  and  to  confirm 
The  nobles  and  the  gentry  of  these  kingdoms 
By  oath  to  your  succession,  which  shall  be 
Within  this  month  at  most. 

Thra.  This  will  be  hardly  done. 

Cle.  It  must  be  ill  done,  if  it  be  done. 

Dion.  When  'tis  at  best,  'twill  be  but  half  done,  whilst 
So  brave  a  gentleman  is  wronged  and  flung  off. 

Thra.  I  fear. 

Cle.  Who  does  not?  130 

Dio7i.  I  fear  not  for  myself,  and  yet  I  fear  too  : 
Well,  we  shall  see,  we  shall  see.     No  more. 

Pha.  Kissing  your  white  hand,  mistress,  I  take  leave 
To  thank  your  royal  father  ;  and  thus  far 
To  be  my  own  free  trumpet.     Understand, 
Great   King,  and   these   your   subjects,  mine  that 

must  be 
(For  so  deserving  you  have  spoke  me,  sir, 
And  so  deserving  I  dare  speak  myself), 
To  what  a  person,  of  what  eminence. 
Ripe  expectation,  of  what  faculties,  140 

Manners  and   virtues,  you  would  wed  your  king- 
doms ; 
You  in  me  have  your  wishes.     Oh,  this  country  ! 
By  more  than  all  the  gods,  I  hold  it  happy  ; 
Happy  in  their  dear  memories  that  have  been 
Kings  great  and  good  ;  happy  in  yours  that  is  ; 
And  from  you  (as  a  chronicle  to  keep 
6 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  «. 

Your  noble  name  from  eating  age)  do  I 

Opine  myself  most  happy.     Gentlemen, 

Believe  me  in  a  word,  a  prince's  word, 

There  shall  be  nothing  to  make  up  a  kingdom     150 

Mighty  and  flourishing,  defencM,  feared, 

Equal  to  be  commanded  and  obeyed. 

But  through  the  travels  of  my  life  I  '11  find  it. 

And  tie  it  to  this  country.     By  all  the  gods 

My  reign  shall  be  so  easy  to  the  subject. 

That  every  man  shall  be  his  prince  himself 

And  his  own  law — yet  I  his  prince  and  law. 

And,  dearest  lady,  to  your  dearest  self 

(Dear  in  the  choice  of  him  whose  name  and  lustre 

Must  make  you  more  and  mightier)  let  me  say,  160 

You  are  the  blessed'st  living  ;  for,  sweet  princess, 

You  shall  enjoy  a  man  of  men  to  be 

Your  servant ;  you  shall  make  him  yours,  for  whom 

Great  queens  must  die. 

Thra.  Miraculous ! 

Cle.  This  speech  calls  him  Spaniard,  being  nothing  but 
a  large  inventory  of  his  own  commendations. 

Dion.  I  wonder  what 's  his  price  ;  for  certainly 

He'll  sell  himself,  he  has  so  praised  his  shape. 
But    here    comes    one    more   worthy  those    large 
speeches. 

Enter  Philaster, 

Than  the  large  speaker  of  them.  170 

7 


ACT  I.  sc.  t.  Philaster 

Let  me  be  swallowed  quick,  if  I  can  find, 

In  all  the  anatomy  of  yon  man's  virtues, 

One  sinew  sound  enough  to  promise  for  him, 

He  shall  be   constable.      By  this  sun,  he'll  ne'er 

make  king, 
Unless  it  be  of  trifles,  in  my  poor  judgment. 
Phi.  {^kneeling.']  Right  noble  sir,  as  low  as  my  obedi- 
ence. 
And  with  a  heart  as  loyal  as  my  knee, 
I  beg  your  favour. 
King.  Rise  ;  you  have  it,  sir.     \Philaster  rises. 

Dion.    Mark    but   the   King,   how  pale   he   looks,    he 
fears  ! 
Oh,  this  same  whorson  conscience,  how  it  jades 
us  !  1 80 

Ki7ig.  Speak  your  intents,  sir. 
Phi.  Shall  I  speak  'em  freely  ? 

Be  still  my  royal  sovereign. 
King.  As  a  subject, 

We  give  you  freedom. 
Dion.  Now  it  heats. 

Phi.  Then  thus  I  turn 

My  language  to  you,  prince  ;  you,  foreign  man  ! 
Ne'er  stare  nor  put  on  wonder,  for  you  must 
Endure  me,  and  you  shall.     This  earth  you  tread 

upon 
(A  dowry,  as  you  hope,  with  this  fair  princess), 
By  my  dead  father  (oh,  I  had  a  father, 
8 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  i. 

Whose  memory  I  bow  to  !)  was  not  left 

To  your  inheritance,  and  I  up  and  living —  190 

Having  myself  about  me  and  my  sword, 

The  souls  of  all  my  name  and  memories, 

These    arms    and    some    few  friends    beside    the 

gods — 
To  part  so  calmly  with  it,  and  sit  still 
And  say,  *  I  might  have  been.'     I  tell  thee,  Phara- 

mond, 
When  thou  art  king,  look  I  be  dead  and  rotten, 
And  my  name  ashes  :  for,  hear  me,  Pharamond  ! 
This  very  ground  thou  goest  on,  this  fat  earth, 
My  father's  friends  made  fertile  with  their  faiths, 
Before  that  day  of  shame  shall  gape  and  swallow 
Thee  and  thy  nation,  like  a  hungry  grave,  201 

Into  her  hidden  bowels  ;  prince,  it  shall  ; 
By  the  just  gods,  it  shall ! 

Pha.  He's  mad  ;  beyond  cure,  mad. 

Dion.  Here  is  a  fellow  has  some  fire  in 's  veins  : 

The  outlandish  prince  looks  like  a  tooth-drawer. 

Phi.  Sir  prince  of  popinjays,  I  '11  make  it  well 
Appear  to  you  I  am  not  mad. 

King.  You  displease  us : 

You  are  too  bold. 

Phi.  No,  sir,  I  am  too  tame. 

Too  much  a  turtle,  a  thing  bom  without  passion, 
A  faint  shadow,  that  every  drunken  cloud  210 

Sails  over,  and  makes  nothing. 
9 


ACT  I.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

King.  I  do  not  fancy  this. 

Call  our  physicians  :  sure,  he 's  somewhat  tainted. 

Thra.  I  do  not  think  'twill  prove  so. 

Dion.  H'as  given  him  a  general  purge  already, 
For  all  the  right  he  has  ;  and  now  he  means 
To  let  him  blood.     Be  constant,  gentlemen  : 
By  heaven,  I  '11  run  his  hazard, 
Although  I  run  my  name  out  of  the  kingdom  ! 

Cle.  Peace,  we  are  all  one  soul. 

Pha.  What  you  have  seen  in  me  to  stir  offence,  220 

I  cannot  find,  unless  it  be  this  lady, 
Offered  into  mine  arms  with  the  succession  ; 
Which  I  must  keep  (though  it  hath  pleased  your 

fury 
To  mutiny  within  you),  without  disputing 
Your  genealogies,  or  taking  knowledge 
Whose  branch  you   are  :    the   King  will  leave  it 

me. 
And  I  dare  make  it  mine.     You  have  your  answer. 

Phi.  If  thou  wert  sole  inheritor  to  him 

That  made  the  world  his,  and  couldst  see  no  sun 
Shine  upon  any  thing  but  thine  ;  were  Pharamond 
As  truly  valiant  as  I  feel  him  cold,  231 

And  ringed  among  the  choicest  of  his  friends 
(Such  as  would  blush  to  talk  such  serious  follies, 
Or  back  such  bellied  commendations), 
And  from  this  presence,  spite  of  all  these  bugs, 
You  should  hear  further  from  me. 

!0 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  i. 

Ki7ig.  Sir,  you  wrong  the  prince  ;  I  gave  you  not  this 
freedom 

To  brave  our  best  friends  :  you  deserve  our  frown. 

Go  to  ;  be  better  tempered. 
Phi.  It  must  be,  sir,  when  I  am  nobler  used.  240 

Gal.  Ladies, 

This  would  have  been  a  pattern  of  succession. 

Had  he  ne'er  met  this  mischief     By  my  life, 

He  is  the  worthiest  the  true  name  of  man 

This  day  within  my  knowledge. 
Meg.  I  cannot  tell  what  you  may  call  your  knowledge  -, 

But  the  other  is  the  man  set  in  mine  eye  : 

Oh,  'tis  a  prince  of  wax  ! 
Gal.  A  dog  it  is. 

King.  Philaster,  tell  me 

The  injuries  you  aim  at  in  your  riddles.  250 

Phi.  If  you  had  my  eyes,  sir,  and  sufferance. 

My  griefs  upon  you  and  my  broken  fortunes, 

My  wants  great,  and  now  nothing-hopes  and  fears, 

My  wrongs  would  make  ill  riddles  to  be  laughed  at. 

Dare  you  be  still  my  king,  and  right  me  ? 
King.  Give  me  your  wrongs  in  private. 
Phi.  Take  them, 

And  ease  me  of  a  load  would  bow  strong  Atlas. 

{They  whisper, 
Cle.  He  dares  not  stand  the  shock. 
Dion.  I  cannot  blame  him  ;  there's  danger  in't.         259 

Every  man  in  this  age  has  not  a  soul  of  crystal,  for 
II 


ACT  I.  sc.  T.  Philaster 

all  men  to  read  their  actions  through  :  men's  hearts 
and  faces  are  so  far  asunder,  that  they  hold  no  in- 
telligence. Do  but  view  yon  stranger  well,  and  you 
shall  see  a  fever  through  all  his  bravery,  and  feel 
him  shake  like  a  true  tenant :  if  he  give  not  back 
his  crown  again  upon  the  report  of  an  elder-gun,  I 
have  no  augury. 

King.  Go  to  ; 

Be  more  yourself,  as  you  respect  our  favour ; 
You'll  stir  us  else.     Sir,  I  must  have  you  know,  270 
That  you  are,  and  shall  be,  at  our  pleasure,  what 
Fashion  we  will  put  upon  you.     Smooth  your  brow, 
Or  by  the  gods 

Phi.  I  am  dead,  sir  ;  you're  my  fate.     It  was  not  I 
Said,  I  was  wronged  :  I  carry  all  about  me 
My  weak  stars  lead  me  to,  all  my  weak  fortunes. 
Who  dares  in  all  this  presence  speak  (that  is 
But  man  of  flesh,  and  may  be  mortal),  tell  me, 
I  do  not  most  entirely  love  this  prince,  279 

And  honour  his  full  virtues  ! 

King.  Sure,  he 's  possessed. 

Phi.  Yes,  with  my  father's  spirit.     It 's  here,  O  King, 
A  dangerous  spirit !  now  he  tells  me.  King, 
I  was  a  king's  heir,  bids  me  be  a  king. 
And  whispers  to  me,  these  are  all  my  subjects. 
'Tis  strange  he  will  not  let  me  sleep,  but  dives 
Into  my  fancy,  and  there  gives  me  shapes 
That  kneel  and  do  me  service,  cry  me  king  : 
12 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  i. 

But  I  '11  suppress  him  ;  he  's  a  factious  spirit, 
And  will  undo  me.     Noble  sir,  your  hand  ; 
I  am  your  servant. 

King.  Away  !  I  do  not  like  this  :     290 

I  '11  make  you  tamer,  or  I  '11  dispossess  you 
Both  of  your  life  and  spirit.     For  this  time 
I  pardon  your  wild  speech,  without  so  much 
As  your  imprisonment. 

{Exeunt  King^  Pharamond,  Ar ethics a^ 
aitd  Attendants. 

Dio7t.  I  thank  you,  sir  1  you  dare  not  for  the  people. 

Gal.  Ladies,  what  think  you  now  of  this  brave  fellow  ? 

Meg.  A  pretty  talking  fellow,  hot  at  hand.  But  eye  yon 
stranger:  is  he  not  a  fine  complete  gentleman? 
Oh,  these  strangers,  I  do  affect  them  strangely ! 
they  do  the  rarest  home-things,  and  please  the 
fullest !  As  I  live,  I  could  love  all  the  nation  over 
and  over  for  his  sake.  302 

Gal.  Gods  comfort  your  poor  head-piece,  lady !  'tis  a 
weak  one,  and  had  need  of  a  night-cap. 

\_Exeunt  Galatea^  Megra^  aitd  Lady. 

Dion.  See,  how  his  fancy  labours  !     Has  he  not 

Spoke    home    and    bravely?     what    a    dangerous 

train 
Did  he  give  fire  to  !  how  he  shook  the  King, 
Made  his  soul  melt  within  him,  and  his  blood 
Run  into  whey  !  it  stood  upon  his  brow 
Like  a  cold  winter-dew. 
13 


ACT  I.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

Phi.  Gentlemen,  310 

You  have  no  suit  to  me  ?     I  am  no  minion  : 
You    stand,    methinks,   like    men    that   would    be 

courtiers, 
If  I  could  well  be  flattered  at  a  price, 
Not  to  undo  your  children.     You  're  all  honest : 
Go,  get  you  home  again,  and  make  your  country 
A  virtuous  court,  to  which  your  great  ones  may. 
In  their  diseased  age,  retire  and  live  recluse. 

Cle.  How  do  you,  worthy  sir? 

Phi.  Well,  very  well  ; 

And  so  well  that,  if  the  King  please,  I  find 
I  may  live  many  years. 

Dio7i.  The  King  must  please,      320 

Whilst  we  know  what  you  are  and  who  you  are, 
Your  wrongs  and  injuries.     Shrink  not,  worthy  sir, 
But  add  your  father  to  you  ;  in  whose  name 
We  '11  waken  all  the  gods,  and  conjure  up 
The  rods  of  vengeance,  the  abused  people, 
Who,  like  to  raging  torrents,  shall  swell  high. 
And  so  begirt  the  dens  of  these  male-dragons. 
That,  through  the  strongest  safety,  they  shall  beg 
For  mercy  at  your  sword's  point. 

Phi.  Friends,  no  more  ; 

Our  ears  may  be  corrupted  ;  'tis  an  age  330 

We  dare  not  trust  our  wills  to.     Do  you  love  me  ? 

Thra.  Do  we  love  heaven  and  honour  ? 

Phi.  My  Lord  Dion,  you  had 

14 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  x. 

A  virtuous  gentlewoman  called  you  father  ; 
Is  she  yet  alive  ? 
Dion.  Most  honoured  sir,  she  is  ; 

And,  for  the  penance  but  of  an  idle  dream, 
Has  undertook  a  tedious  pilgrimage. 

Enter  a  Lady. 

Phi.  Is  it  to  me. 

Or  any  of  these  gentlemen,  you  come  ? 
Lady.  To  you,  brave  lord  ;  the  princess  would  entreat 

Your  present  company.  340 

Phi.  The  princess  send  for  me  !  you  are  mistaken. 
Lady.  If  you  be  called  Philaster,  'tis  to  you. 
Phi.  Kiss  her  fair  hand,  and  say  I  will  attend  her. 

\Exit  Lady. 
Dion.  Do  you  know  what  you  do  ? 
Phi.  Yes  ;  go  to  see  a  woman. 

Cle.  But  do  you  weigh  the  danger  you  are  in  ? 
Phi.  Danger  in  a  sweet  face  ! 

By  Jupiter,  I  must  not  fear  a  woman  ! 
Thra.  But  are  you  sure  it  was  the  princess  sent  ? 

It  may  be  some  foul  train  to  catch  your  life. 
Phi.  I  do  not  think  it,  gentlemen  ;  she's  noble.  350 

Her  eye  may  shoot  me  dead,  or  those  true  red 

And  white  friends  in  her  cheeks  may  steal  my  soul 
out; 

There 's  all  the  danger  in 't :  but,  be  what  may. 

Her  single  name  hath  armed  me.  \Exit. 


ACT  I.  sc.  X.  Philaster 

Dion.  Go  on, 

And  be  as  truly  happy  as  thou  'rt  fearless  !  355 

Come,  gentlemen,  let's  make  our  friends  acquainted, 
Lest  the  King  prove  false.  \Exeicnt. 


SCENE  II 

ArethuscHs  Apartme7it  iii  the  Palace, 
Enter  Arethusa  a?id  a  Lady. 

Are.  Comes  he  not  ? 

Lady.  Madam? 

Are.  Will  Philaster  come  ? 

Lady.  Dear  madam,  you  were  wont  to  credit  me 
At  first. 

Are.  But  didst  thou  tell  me  so? 

I  am  forgetful,  and  my  woman's  strength 

Is  so  o'ercharged  with  dangers  like  to  grow 

About  my  marriage,  that  these  under-things 

Dare  not  abide  in  such  a  troubled  sea. 

How  looked  he  when  he  told  thee  he  would  come  ? 

Lady.  Why,  well. 

Are.  And  not  a  little  fearful  ? 

Lady.  Fear,  madam  !  sure,  he  knows  not  what  it  is.     10 

Are.  You  are  all  of  his  faction  ;  the  whole  court 
Is  bold  in  praise  of  him  ;  whilst  I 
May  live  neglected,  and  do  noble  things, 
16 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  2. 

As  fools  in  strife  throw  gold  into  the  sea, 
Drowned  in  the  doing.     But,  I  know  he  fears. 

Lady.  Fear,  madam  !  methought,  his  looks  hid  more 
Of  love  than  fear. 

Are.  Of  love  !  to  whom  ?  to  you  ? 

Did  you  deliver  those  plain  words  I  sent, 
With  such  a  winning  gesture  and  quick  look 
That  you  have  caught  him  1 

Lady.  Madam,  I  mean  to  you 

Are.  Of  love  to  me  !  alas,  thy  ignorance  21 

Lets  thee  not  see  the  crosses  of  our  births  ! 
Nature,  that  loves  not  to  be  questioned 
Why  she  did  this  or  that,  but  has  her  ends, 
And  knows  she  does  well,  never  gave  the  world 
Two  things  so  opposite,  so  contrary. 
As  he  and  I  am  :  if  a  bowl  of  blood, 
Drawn  from  this  arm  of  mine,  would  poison  thee, 
A  draught  of  his  would  cure  thee.     Of  love  to  me  ! 

L^ady.  Madam,  I  think  I  hear  him. 

Are.  Bring  him  in.     [Exit  Lady. 

You  gods,  that  would  not  have  your  dooms  with- 
stood, 31 
Whose  holy  wisdoms  at  this  time  it  is, 
To  make  the  passions  of  a  feeble  maid 
The  way  unto  your  justice,  I  obey. 


17 


ACT  I.  sc.  2.  Philaster 


Re-e?ifer  Lady  with  Philaster. 

Lady.  Here  is  my  Lord  Philaster. 

Are.  Oh,  'tis  well 

Withdraw  yourself.  \Exit  Lady, 

Phi.  Madam,  your  messenger 

Made  me  believe  you  wished  to  speak  with  me. 

Are.  'Tis  true,  Philaster ;  but  the  words  are  such 
I  have  to  say,  and  do  so  ill  beseem  ^ 

The  mouth  of  woman,  that  I  wish  them  said,         40 
And  yet  am  loath  to  speak  them.     Have  you  known 
That  I  have  aught  detracted  from  your  worth  ? 
Have  I  in  person  wronged  you  ?  or  have  set 
My  baser  instruments  to  throw  disgrace 
Upon  your  virtues? 

Phi.  Never,  madam,  you. 

A.re.  Why,  then,  should  you,  in  such  a  public  place, 
Injure  a  princess,  and  a  scandal  lay 
Upon  my  fortunes,  famed  to  be  so  great, 
Calling  a  great  part  of  my  dowry  in  question  ? 

Phi.  Madam,  this  truth  which  I  shall  speak  will  be      50 
Foolish  :  but,  for  your  fair  and  virtuous  self, 
I  could  afford  myself  to  have  no  right 
To  any  thing  you  wished. 

A7e.  Philaster,  knov/, 

I  must  enjoy  these  kingdoms. 

Phi.  Madam,  both  ? 

18 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  ■. 

Are.  Both,  or  I  die  :  by  heaven,  I  die,  Philaster, 
If  I  not  calmly  may  enjoy  them  both. 

Phi.  I  would  do  much  to  save  that  noble  life  : 
Yet  would  be  loath  to  have  posterity 
Find  in  our  stories,  that  Philaster  gave 
His  right  unto  a  sceptre  and  a  crown  60 

To  save  a  lady's  longing. 

Are.                                              Nay,  then,  hear  : 
I  must  and  will  have  them,  and  more 

Phi.  What  more  ? 

Are.  Or  lose  that  little  life  the  gods  prepared 
To  trouble  this  poor  piece  of  earth  withal. 

Phi.  Madam,  what  more  ? 

Are.  Turn,  then,  away  thy  face. 

Phi.  No. 

Are.  Do. 

Phi.  I  can  endure  it.     Turn  away  my  face  ! 
I  never  yet  saw  enemy  that  looked 
So  dreadfully,  but  that  I  thought  myself 
As  great  a  basilisk  as  he  ;  or  spake  70 

So  horribly,  but  that  I  thought  my  tongue 
Bore  thunder  underneath,  as  much  as  his  ; 
Nor  beast  that  I  could  turn  from  :  shall  I  then 
Begin  to  fear  sweet  sounds  ?  a  lady's  voice, 
Whom    I   do    love?      Say,   you  would    have    my 

life; 
Why,  I  will  give  it  you  ;  for  'tis  to  me 
A  thing  so  loathed,  and  unto  you  that  ask 
19 


ACT  I.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Of  so  poor  use,  that  I  shall  make  no  price  : 

If  you  entreat,  I  will  unmovedly  hear. 
Are.  Yet,  for  my  sake,  a  little  bend  thy  looks.  79 

Phi,  I  do. 

Are.  Then  know,  I  must  have  them  and  thee. 

Phi.  And  me  ? 
Are.  Thy  love  ;  without  which,  all  the  land 

Discovered  yet  will  serve  me  for  no  use 

But  to  be  buried  in. 
Phi.  I s't  possible? 

Are.  With  it,  it  were  too  little  to  bestow 

On  thee.     Now,  though  thy  breath  do   strike  me 
dead 

(Which,  know,  it  may),  I  have  unript  my  breast. 
Phi.  Madam,  you  are  too  full  of  noble  thoughts, 

To  lay  a  train  for  this  contemned  life. 

Which  you  may  have  for  asking :  to  suspect 

Were  base,  where  I  deserve  no  ill.     Love  ycu  !     90 

By  all  my  hopes,  I  do,  above  my  life  ! 

But  how  this  passion  should  proceed  from  you 

So  violently,  would  amaze  a  man 

That  would  be  jealous. 
Are.  Another  soul  into  my  body  shot 

Could  not  have  filled  me  with  more  strength  and 
spirit 

Than  this  thy  breath.    But  spend  not  hasty  time 

In  seeking  how  I  came  thus  :  'tis  the  gods. 

The  gods,  that  make  me  so  ;  and,  sure,  our  love 
20 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  .. 

Will  be  the  nobler  and  the  better  blest,  loo 

In  that  the  secret  justice  of  the  gods 

Is  mingled  with  it.     Let  us  leave,  and  kiss  ; 

Lest  some  unwelcome  guest  should  fall  betwixt  us, 

And  we  should  part  without  it. 

Phi.  'Twill  be  ill 

I  should  abide  here  long. 

Are.  'Tis  true  ;  and  worse 

You  should  come  often.     How  shall  we  devise 
To  hold  intelligence,  that  our  true  loves, 
On  any  new  occasion,  may  agree 
What  path  is  best  to  tread  ? 

Phi.  I  have  a  boy. 

Sent  by  the  gods,  I  hope,  to  this  intent  no 

Not  yet  seen  in  the  court.     Hunting  the  buck, 
I  found  him  sitting  by  a  fountain's  side, 
Of  which  he  borrowed  some  to  quench  his  thirst, 
And  paid  the  nymph  again  as  much  in  tears. 
A  garland  lay  him  by,  made  by  himself 
Of  many  several  flowers  bred  in  the  vale, 
Stuck  in  that  mystic  order  that  the  rareness 
Delighted  me  :  but  ever  when  he  turned 
His  tender  eyes  upon  'em,  he  would  weep, 
As  if  he  meant  to  make  'em  grow  again.  120 

Seeing  such  pretty  helpless  innocence 
Dwell  in  his  face,  I  asked  him  all  his  story  : 
He  told  me  that  his  parents  gentle  died, 
Leaving  him  to  the  mercy  of  the  fields 
21 


ACT  I.  sc.  z.  Philaster 

Which  gave  him  roots  ;  and  of  the  crystal  springs, 

Which  did  not  stop  their  courses  ;  and  the  sun, 

Which  still,  he  thanked  him,  yielded  him  his  light. 

Then  took  he  up  his  garland,  and  did  show 

What  every  flower,  as  country-people  hold, 

Did  signify,  and  how  all,  ordered  thus,  130 

Expressed  his  grief ;  and,  to  my  thoughts,  did  read 

The  prettiest  lecture  of  his  country-art 

That  could  be  wished  :  so  that  methought  I  could 

Have  studied  it.     I  gladly  entertained 

Him,  who  was  glad  to  follow  ;  and  have  got 

The  trustiest,  loving'st,  and  the  gentlest  boy 

That  ever  master  kept.     Him  will  I  send 

To  wait  on  you,  and  bear  our  hidden  love. 

Re-e7iier  Lady. 

Are.  'Tis  well  ;  no  more. 

Lady.  Madam,  the  prince  is  come  to  do  his  service. 
Are.  What  will  you  do,  Philaster,  with  yourself?         141 
Phi.  Why,  that  which  all  the  gods  have  appointed  out 

for  me. 
Are.  Dear,  hide  thyself.— 

Bring  in  the  prince.  \_Exit Lady. 

PJii.  Hide  me  from  Pharamond  ! 

When  thunder  speaks,  which  is  the  voice  of  Jove, 

Though  I  do  reverence,  yet  I  hide  me  not ; 

And  shall  a  stranger-prince  have  leave  to  brag 
22 


Philaster  acti.  sc.2. 

Unto  a  foreign  nation,  that  he  made 
Philaster  hide  himself? 

Are.  He  cannot  know  it. 

Phi.  Though  it  should  sleep  for  ever  to  the  world,      150 
It  is  a  simple  sin  to  hide  myself. 
Which  will  for  ever  on  my  conscience  lie. 

Are.  Then,  good  Philaster,  give  him  scope  and  way 
In  what  he  says  ;  for  he  is  apt  to  speak 
What  you  are  loath  to  hear  :  for  my  sake,  do. 

Phi.  I  will. 

Re-enter  Lady  with  Pharamond. 

Pha.  My  princely  mistress,  as  true  lovers  ought, 

I  come  to  kiss  these  fair  hands,  and  to  show, 

[Exit  Lady, 

In  outward  ceremonies,  the  dear  love 

Writ  in  my  heart.  i6o 

Phi.  If  I  shall  have  an  answer  no  directlier, 

I  am  gone. 
Pha.  To  what  would  he  have  answer? 

Are.  To  his  claim  unto  the  kingdom. 

Pha.  Sirrah,  I  forbare  you  before  the  King 

Phi.  Good  sir,  do  so  still :  I  would  not  talk  with  yoiL 
Pha.  But  now  the  time  is  fitter  :  do  but  offer 

To  make  mention  of  right  to  any  kingdom, 

Though  it  be  scarce  habitable 

Phi.  Good  sir,  let  me  go. 

23 


ACT  I.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Pha.  And  by  the  gods 

Phi.  Peace,  Pharamond  !  if  thou 

Are.  Leave  us,  Philaster.     170 

Phi.  I  have  done.  {Going. 

Pha.         You  are  gone  !  by  Heaven  I  '11  fetch  you  back. 

Phi.  You  shall  not  need.  \Reticrning. 

Pha.  What  now  ? 

Phi.  Know,  Pharamond, 

I  loathe  to  brawl  with  such  a  blast  as  thou, 
Who  art  nought  but  a  valiant  voice  ;  but  if 
Thou  shalt  provoke  me  further,  men  shall  say, 
'  Thou  wert,'  and  not  lament  it. 

Pha.  Do  you  slight 

My  greatness  so,  and  in  the  chamber  of 
The  princess  ? 

Phi.  It  is  a  place  to  which  I  must  confess 

I  owe  a  reverence  ;  but  were't  the  church,  180 

Ay,  at  the  altar,  there 's  no  place  so  safe, 
Wliere  thou  dar'st  injure  me,  but  I  dare  kill  thee  : 
And  for  your  greatness,  know,  sir,  I  can  grasp 
You  and  your  greatness  thus,  thus  into  nothing. 
Give  not  a  word,  not  a  word  back  !     Farewell. 

\_Exit. 

Pha.  'Tis  an  odd  fellow,  madam  ;  we  must  stop 

His  mouth  with  some  office  when  we  are  married. 

Are.  You  were  best  make  him  your  controller. 

Pha.  I  think  he  would  discharge  it  well.     But,  madam., 
I  hope  our  hearts  are  knit ;  and  yet  so  slow         190 
24 


Philaster  act  i.  sc.  ., 

The  ceremonies  of  state  are,  that  'twill  be  long 
Before  our  hands  be  so.     If  then  you  please, 
Being  agreed  in  heart,  let  us  not  wait 
For  dreaming  form,  but  take  a  little  stolen 
Delights,  and  so  prevent  our  joys  to  come. 

Aj'c.  If  you  dare  speak  such  thoughts,  I  must  withdraw 
in  honour.  \^Exit. 

Pha.  The  constitution  of  my  body  will  never  hold  out 
till  the  wedding  ;  I  must  seek  elsewhere.         {Exit. 


25 


ACT  II.  sc.  I,  Philaster 


ACT   THE   SECOND 

SCENE  I 
A^:  A'partment  in  the  Palace. 
Enter  Philaster  and  Bellario. 

Phi.  And  thou  shalt  find  her  honourable,  boy  ; 
Full  of  regard  unto  thy  tender  youth, 
For  thine  own  modesty  ;  and,  for  my  sake, 
Apter  to  give  than  thou  wilt  be  to  ask, 
Ay,  or  deserve. 

Bel.  Sir,  you  did  take  me  up 

When  I  was  nothing  ;  and  only  yet  am  something 
By  being  yours.     You  trusted  me  unknov/n  ; 
And  that  which  you  were  apt  to  conster 
A  simple  innocence  in  me,  perhaps 
Might  have  been  craft,  the  cunning  of  a  boy  lO 

Hardened  in  lies  and  theft :  yet  ventured  you 
To  part  my  miseries  and  me  ;  for  which, 
I  never  can  expect  to  serve  a  lady 
That  bears  more  honour  in  her  breast  than  you, 
26 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  i. 

Phi.  But,  boy,  it  will  prefer  thee.    Thou  art  young, 
And  bear'st  a  childish  overflowing  love 
To  them  that  clap  thy  cheeks  and  speak  thee  fair 

yet; 
But    when    thy   judgment    comes    to    rule    those 

passions, 
Thou  wilt  remember  best  those  careful  friends 
That  placed  thee  in  the  noblest  way  of  life.  20 

She  is  a  princess  I  prefer  thee  to. 

Bel.  In  that  small  time  that  I  have  seen  the  world, 
I  never  knew  a  man  hasty  to  part  with 
A  servant  he  thought  trusty  :  I  remember, 
My  father  would  prefer  the  boys  he  kept 
To  greater  men  than  he  ,  but  did  it  not 
Till  they  were  grown  too  saucy  for  himself. 

Phi.  Why,  gentle  boy,  I  find  no  fault  at  all 
In  thy  behaviour. 

Bel.  Sir,  if  I  have  made 

A  fault  in  ignorance,  instruct  my  youth  :  30 

I  shall  be  willing,  if  not  apt,  to  learn  ; 
Age  and  experience  will  adorn  my  mind 
With  larger  knowledge  ;  and  if  I  have  done 
A  wilful  fault,  think  me  not  past  all  hope 
For  once.     What  master  holds  so  strict  a  hand 
Over  his  boy,  that  he  will  part  with  him 
Without  one  warning  ?     Let  me  be  corrected, 
To  break  my  stubbornness,  if  it  be  so, 
Rather  than  turn  me  off ;  and  I  shall  mend. 
27 


ACT  II.  sc.  X.  Philaster 

Ptii.  Thy  love  doth  plead  so  prettily  to  stay,  40 

That,  trust  me,  I  could  weep  to  part  with  thee. 
Alas,  I  do  not  turn  thee  off !  thou  know'st 
It  is  my  business  that  doth  call  thee  hence ; 
And  when  thou  art  with  her,  thou  dwell'st  with  me. 
Think  so,  and  'tis  so  :  and  when  time  is  full, 
That  thou  hast  well  discharged  this  heavy  trust, 
Laid  on  so  weak  a  one,  I  will  again 
With  joy  receive  thee  ;  as  I  live,  I  will ! 
Nay,  weep  not,  gentle  boy.     'Tis  more  than  time 
Thou  didst  attend  the  princess. 

BeL  I  am  gone.         50 

But  since  I  am  to  part  with  you,  my  lord. 
And  none  knows  whether  I  shall  live  to  do 
More  service  for  you,  take  this  little  prayer : 
Heaven    bless   your    loves,  your    fights,   all    your 

designs  ! 
May  sick  men,  if  they  have  your  wish,  be  well ; 
And  Heaven  hate  those  you  curse,  though   I   be 
one !  \^Exit. 

Phi.  The  love  of  boys  unto  their  lords  is  strange  : 
I  have  read  wonders  of  it :  yet  this  boy 
For  my  sake  (if  a  man  may  judge  by  looks 
And  speech)  would  out-do  story.     I  may  see  60 

A  day  to  pay  him  for  his  loyalty.  \_ExiL 


28 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  a. 

SCENE    II 

A  Gallery  in  the  Palace. 
Enter  Pharamond, 

Pha.  Why  should  these  ladies  stay  so  long  ?  They  must 
come  this  way  :  I  know  the  queen  employs  'em 
not ;  for  the  reverend  mother  sent  me  word,  they 
would  all  be  for  the  garden.  If  they  should  all 
prove  honest  now,  I  were  in  a  fair  taking  ;  I  was 
never  so  long  without  sport  in  my  life,  and,  in  my 
conscience,  'tis  not  my  fault.  Oh,  for  our  country 
ladies  ! 

Enter  Galatea. 

Here's  one  bolted;  I'll  hound  at  her.  [Aside.'] 
Madam !  lo 

Gal.  Your  grace ! 

Pha.  Shall  I  not  be  a  trouble  ? 

Gal.  Not  to  me,  sir. 

P/ia.  Nay,  nay,  you  are  too  quick.  By  this  sweet 
hand 

Gal.  You'll  be  forsworn,  sir;  'tis  but  an  old  glove.     If 

you  will  talk  at  distance,  I  am  for  you  :  but,  good 

prince,  be  not  bawdy,  nor  do  not  brag  ;  these  two  I 

bar ;  and  then,  I  think,  I  shall  have  sense  enough 

29 


ACT  II.  sc.  s.  Philaster 

to  answer  all  the  weighty  apophthegms  your  royal 
blood  shall  manage.  21 

Pha.  Dear  lady,  can  you  love  ? 

Gal.  Dear  prince  !  how  dear?  I  ne'er  cost  you  a  coach 
yet,  nor  put  you  to  the  dear  repentance  of  a  banquet. 
Here's  no  scarlet,  sir,  to  blush  the  sin  out  it  was 
given  for.  This  wire  mine  own  hair  covers ;  and 
this  face  has  been  so  far  from  being  dear  to  any, 
that  it  ne'er  cost  penny  painting  ;  and,  for  the  rest 
of  my  poor  wardrobe,  such  as  you  see,  it  leaves  no 
hand  behind  it,  to  make  the  jealous  mercer's  wife 
curse  our  good  doings,  31 

Pha.  You  mistake  me,  lady. 

Gal.  Lord,  I  do  so  :  would  you  or  I  could  help  it ! 

Pha.  You  're  very  dangerous  bitter,  like  a  potion. 

Gal.  No,  sir,  I  do  not  mean  to  purge  you,  though 
I  mean  to  purge  a  little  time  on  you. 

Pha.  Do  ladies  of  this  country  use  to  give 

No  more  respect  to  men  of  my  full  being? 

Gal.  Full  being  !  I  understand  you  not,  unless  you. 
grace  means  growing  to  fatness  ;  and  then  your 
only  remedy  (upon  my  knowledge,  prince)  is,  in  a 
morning,  a  cup  of  neat  white  wine  brewed  with 
carduus,  then  fast  till  supper ;  about  eight  you  may 
eat ;  use  exercise,  and  keep  a  sparrow-hawk ;  you 
can  shoot  in  a  tiller :  but,  of  all,  your  grace  must 
fly  phlebotomy,  fresh  pork,  conger,  and  clarified 
whey  ;  they  are  all  duller  of  the  vital  spirits. 
30 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  a. 

Pha.  Lady,  you  talk  of  nothing  all  this  while. 

Gal.  'Tis  very  true,  sir  ;  I  talk  of  you.  49 

Pha.  This  is  a  crafty  wench  ;  I  like  her  wit  well ;  'twill 
be  rare  to  stir  up  a  leaden  appetite  :  she 's  a  Danae, 
and  must  be  courted  in  a  shower  of  gold  [Aside.] — 
Madam,  look  here  ;  all  these,  and  more  than 

Gal.  What  have  you  there,  my  lord .''  gold !  now,  as  I 
live,  'tis  fair  gold  !  You  would  have  silver  for  it, 
to  play  with  the  pages  :  you  could  not  have  taken 
me  in  a  worse  time ;  but,  if  you  have  present  use, 
my  lord,  I'll  send  my  man  with  silver  and  keep 
your  gold  for  you.  [Takes  gold. 

Pha.  Lady,  lady  !  60 

Gal.  She 's  coming,  sir,  behind,  will  take  white  money. — 
Yet  for  all  this  I  '11  match  ye. 

[Aside.     Exit  behind  the  hangings. 

Pha.  If  there  be  but  two  such  more  in  this  kingdom, 
and  near  the  court,  we  may  even  hang  up  our  harps. 
Ten  such  camphire  constitutions  as  this  would  call 
the  golden  age  again  in  question,  and  teach  the  old 
way  for  every  ill-faced  husband  to  get  his  own 
children  ;  and  what  a  mischief  that  would  breed, 
let  all  consider !  70 

E?iter  Megra. 

Here's  another:  if  she  be  of  the  same  last,  the 
devil  shall  pluck  her  on.  [Aside.] — Many  fair 
mornings,  lady. 

31 


ACT  II.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Meg.  As  many  mornings  bring  as  many  days, 
Fair,  sweet,  and  hopeful  to  your  grace  ! 

Pha.  She  gives  good  words  yet ;    sure  this  wench  is 
free. —  {Aside. 

If  your  more  serious  business  do  not  call  you, 
Let  me  hold  quarter  with  you  ;  we  will  talk 
An  hour  out  quickly. 

Meg.  What  would  your  grace  talk  of? 

Pha.  Of  some  such  pretty  subject  as  yourself :  80 

I  '11  go  no  further  than  your  eye,  or  lip  ; 
There's  theme  enough  for  one  man  for  an  age. 

Meg.  Sir,  they  stand  right,  and  my  lips  are  yet  even, 
smooth. 
Young  enough,  ripe  enough,  and  red  enough, 
Or  my  glass  wrongs  me. 

Pha.  Oh,  they  are  two  twinned  cherries  dyed  in  blushes 
Which   those   fair  suns    above   with    their    bright 

beams 
Reflect  upon  and  ripen.     Sweetest  beauty. 
Bow  down  those  branches,  that  the  longing  taste 
Of  the  faint  looker-on  may  meet  those  blessings,  90 
And  taste  and  live. 

Meg.  Oh,  delicate  sweet  prince  ! 

She  that  hath  snow  enough  about  her  heart 
To  take  the  wanton  spring  of  ten  such  lines  off, 
May  be  a  nun  without  probation.     [Aside.] — Sir, 
You  have  in  such  neat  poetry  gathered  a  kiss. 
That  if  I  had  but  five  lines  of  that  number, 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  a. 

Such  pretty  begging  blanks,  I  should  commend 
Your  forehead  or  your  cheeks,  and  kiss  you  too. 

Pha.  Do  it  in  prose ;  you  cannot  miss  it,  madam. 

Meg,  I  shall,  I  shall. 

Pha.  By  my  life,  but  you  shall  not ;  loo 

I  'II  prompt  you  first.     SjKisses  her.^     Can  you  do  it 
now? 

Aleg.  Methinks  'tis  easy,  now  you  ha'  done't  before  me  ; 
But  yet  I  should  stick  at  it. 

P/ia.  Stick  till  to-morrow  ; 

I  '11  never  part  you,  sweetest.     But  we  lose  time  : 
Can  you  love  me  ? 

Meg.  Love  you,  my  lord  !  how  would  you  have  me  love 
you? 

Pha.  I  '11  teach  you  in  a  short  sentence,  'cause  I  will 
not  load  your  memory  :  this  is  all ;  love  me,  and  lie 
with  me. 

Meg.  Was  it  lie  with  you,  you  said?  'tis  impossible,   no 

Pha.  Not  to  a  willing  mind,  that  will  endeavour  :  if  I 
do  not  teach  you  to  do  it  as  easily  in  one  night  as 
you'll  go  to  bed,  I  '11  lose  my  royal  blood  for't. 

Meg.  Why,  prince,  you  have  a  lady  of  your  own 
That  yet  wants  teaching. 

Pha.  I  '11  sooner  teach  a  mare  the  old  measures,  than 
teach  her  anything  belonging  to  the  function.  She's 
afraid  to  lie  with  herself,  if  she  have  but  any  mascu- 
line imaginations  about  her.  I  know,  when  we  are 
married,  I  must  ravish  her.  120 


ACT  II.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Meg.  By  my  honour,  that 's  a  foul  fault,  indeed  ; 

But  time  and  your  good  help  will  wear  it  out,  sir. 

Pha.  And  for  any  other  I  see,  excepting  your  dear  self, 
dearest  lady,  I  had  rather  be  Sir  Tim  the  school- 
master, and  leap  a  dairy-maid. 

Meg.  Has  your  grace  seen  the  court  star,  Galatea  ? 

Pha.  Out  upon  her !  she 's  as  cold  of  her  favour  as  an 
apoplex  :  she  sailed  by  but  now. 

Meg.  And  how  do  you  hold  her  wit,  sir  ?  129 

Pha.  I  hold  her  wit?  The  strength  of  all  the  guard 
cannot  hold  it,  if  they  were  tied  to  it  ;  she  would 
blow  'em  out  of  the  kingdom.  They  talk  of  Jupiter  ; 
he 's  but  a  squib-cracker  to  her :  look  well  about 
you,  and  you  may  find  a  tongue-bolt.  But  speak, 
sweet  lady,  shall  I  be  freely  welcome  ? 

Meg.  Whither? 

Pha.  To  your  bed.  If  you  mistrust  my  faith,  you  do  me 
the  unnoblest  wrong. 

Meg.  I  dare  not,  prince,  I  dare  not.  139 

Pha.  Make  your  own  conditions,  my  purse  shall  seal  'em  ; 
and  what  you  dare  imagine  you  can  want,  I'll  furnish 
you  withal :  give  two  hours  to  your  thoughts  every 
morning  about  it.  Come,  I  know  you  are  bashful ; 
Speak  in  my  ear,  will  you  be  mine  ?    Keep  this, 

[^Gives  her  a  ring. 
And  with  it  me  :  soon  I  will  visit  you. 

Meg.  My  lord,  150 

My  chamber 's  most  unsafe  ;  but  when  'tis  night, 
34 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  3. 

I  '11  find  some  means  to  slip  into  your  lodging  ; 

Till  when 

Pha.  Till  when,  this  and  my  heart  go  with  thee  !        150 

\_Exeunt  severally. 

Re-enter  Galatea. 

Gal.  Oh,  thou  pernicious  petticoat  prince  !    are  these 

your  virtues?      Well,  if  I    do  not   lay  a  train   to 

blow  your  sport  up,  I  am  no  woman  :   and.  Lady 

Towsabel,  I  '11  fit  you  for 't.  {Exit. 

SCENE  III 

Aretkusa^s  Apartment  in  the  Palace. 

Enter  Arethusa  and  a  Lady. 

Are.  Where  's  the  boy  ? 

Lady.  Within,  madam. 

Are.  Gave  you  him  gold  to  buy  him  clothes  ? 

Lady.  I  did. 

Are.  And  has  he  done't? 

Lady.  Yes,  madam. 

Are.  'Tis  a  pretty  sad-talking  boy,  is  it  not  ? 

Asked  you  his  name  ? 
Lady.  No,  madam. 

Enter  Galatea. 
Are.  Oh,  you  are  welcome.     What  good  news  ?  10 

Gal.  As  good  as  any  one  can  tell  your  grace. 

That  says,  she  has  done  that  you  would  have  wished. 
35 


ACT  II.  sc,  3.  Philaster 

Are.  Hast  thou  discovered  ? 

Gal.  I  have  strained  a  point 

Of  modesty  for  you. 

Are.  I  prithee,  how  ? 

Gal.  In  listening  after  bawdry.     I  see,  let  a  lady 
Live  never  so  modestly,  she  shall  be  sure  to  find 
A  lawful  time  to  hearken  after  bawdry. 
Your  prince,  brave  Pharamond,  was  so  hot  on 't  \ 

Are.  With  whom  ? 

Gal.  Why,  with  the  lady  I  suspected  : 

I  can  tell  the  time  and  place. 

Are.  Ch,  when,  and  where  ? 

Gal.  To-night,  his  lodging.  20 

Ai-e.  Run  thyself  into  the  presence  ;  mingle  there  again 
With  other  ladies  ;  leave  the  rest  to  me. 

{Exit  Galatea. 
If  destiny  (to  whom  we  dare  not  say, 
Why  thou  didst  this)  have  not  decreed  it  so, 
In  lasting  leaves  (whose  smallest  characters 
Was  never  altered  yet),  this  match  shall  break. 

\Aside. 
Where 's  the  boy  ? 

Lady.  Here,  madam. 

Enter  Bellario^  richly  dressed. 
Are.  Sir, 

You  are  sad  to  change  your  service  ;  is 't  not  so  ? 
Bel.  Madam,  I  have  not  changed  ;  I  wait  on  you,        30 
To  do  him  service. 

36 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  3. 

Are.  Thou  dwclaim'st  in  me. 

Tell  me  thy  name. 

Bel.  Bellario. 

Are,  Thou  canst  sing  and  play? 

Bel.  If  grief  will  give  me  leave,  madam,  I  can. 

Are.  Alas,  what  kind  of  grief  can  thy  years  know? 

Hadst  thou  a  curst  master  when  thou  went'st  to 

school  ? 
Thou  art  not  capable  of  other  grief ; 
Thy  brows  and  cheeks  are  smooth  as  waters  be 
When  no  breath  troubles  them  :  believe  me,  boy, 
Care  seeks  out  wrinkled  brows  and  hollow  eyes, 
And  builds  himself  caves,  to  abide  in  them.  40 

Come,  sir,  tell  me  truly,  does  your  lord  love  me  ? 

Bel.  Love,  madam  !  I  know  not  what  it  is. 

Are.  Canst  thou  know  grief,  and  never  yet  knew'st  love? 
Thou  art  deceived,  boy.     Does  he  speak  of  me 
As  if  he  wished  me  well  ? 

Bel  Ifitbelove 

To  forget  all  respect  of  his  own  friends 
With  thinking  of  your  face  ;  if  it  be  love 
To  sit  cross-armed  and  sigh  away  the  day, 
Mingled  with  starts,  crying  your  name  as  loud 
And  hastily  as  men  i'  the  streets  do  fire  ;  50 

If  it  be  love  to  weep  himself  away 
When  he  but  hears  of  any  lady  dead 
Or  killed,  because  it  might  have  been  your  chance  ; 
If,  when  he  goes  to  rest  (which  will  not  be), 
37 


ACT  II.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

'Twixt  every  prayer  he  says,  to  name  you  once, 
As  others  drop  a  bead,  be  to  be  in  love, 
Then,  madam,  I  dare  swear  he  loves  you. 
A7-e.  Oh,  you're  a  cunning  boy,  and  taught  to  he 
For  your  lord's  credit  !  but  thou  know'st  a  He 
That  bears  this  sound  is  welcomer  to  me  60 

Than  any  truth  that  says  he  loves  me  not. 
Lead  the  way,  boy. — Do  you  attend  me  too. — 
'Tis  thy  lord's  business  hastes  me  thus.     Away  ! 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE  IV 
Before  Pharainond's  Lodging  in  the  Court  of  the  Palace. 
Enter  Dion^  Clereinont,  Thrasiline,  Megra,  and  Galatea. 

Dio7i.  Come,  ladies,  shall  we  talk  a  round  ?     As  men 

Do  walk  a  mile,  women  should  talk  an  hour 

After  supper  :  'tis  their  exercise. 
Gal.  'Tis  late. 

Meg.  'Tis  all 

My  eyes  will  do  to  lead  me  to  my  bed. 
Gal.  I  fear,  they  are  so  heavy,  you  '11  scarce  find 

The  way  to  your  own  lodging  with  'em  to-night. 

Enter  Pharamond. 

Thra.  The  prince  I 

Pha.  Not  a-bed,  ladies  ?  you're  good  sitters-up  : 
38 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  4. 

What  think  you  of  a  pleasant  dream,  to  last 
Till  morning  ?  lo 

Meg.  I  should  choose,  my  lord,  a  pleasing  wake  before 
it. 

Eftter  Arethusa  and  Bellario. 

Are.  'Tis    well,   my    lord;    you're    courting    of   these 
ladies. — 
Is 't  not  late,  gentlemen  ? 

Cle.  Yes,  madam. 

Are.  Wait  you  there.     \Exit, 

Meg.  She's  jealous,  as  I  live.  [Aside.] — Look  you,  my 
lord, 
The  princess  has  a  Hylas,  an  Adonis. 

F/ia.  His  form  is  angel-like. 

Meg.  Why,  this  is  he 

That  must,  when  you  are  wed,  sit  by  your  pillow, 
Like  young  Apollo,  with  his  hand  and  voice 
Binding  your  thoughts  in  sleep  ;  the  princess 
Does  provide  him  for  you  and  for  herself.  20 

P/ia.  I  find  no  music  in  these  boys. 

Meg.  Nor  I  : 

They  can  do  little,  and  that  small  they  do. 
They  have  not  wit  to  hide. 

D/o;7.  Serves  he  the  princess  ? 

T/ira.  Yes> 

Dion.  'Tis  a  sweet  boy  :  how  brave  she  keeps  him  ! 
39 


ACT  II.  sc.  ♦.  Philaster 

Pha.  Ladies  all,  good  rest ;  I  mean  to  kill  a  buck 

To-morrow  morning  ere  you  've  done  your  dreams. 

Meg.  All  happiness  attend  your  grace  ! 

\Exit  Pharamond. 
Gentlemen,  good  rest. — Come,  shall  we  go  to  bed  ? 

GaL  Yes.— All,  good  night. 

Dion.  May  your  dreams  be  true  to  you  ! — 

\Exeunt  Galatea  and  Megra. 

What  shall  we  do,  gallants  ?  'tis  late.     The  King  30 

Is  up  still :  see,  he  comes  ;  a  guard  along  with  him. 


Enter  King  with  Arethusa^  Guards^  a7id  Attendaiiis. 

King.  Look  your  intelligence  be  true. 
Af-e.  Upon  my  life,  it  is  :  and  I  do  hope 

Your  highness  will  not  tie  me  to  a  man 

That  in  the  heat  of  wooing  throws  me  off. 

And  takes  another. 
Dion.  What  should  this  mean  ? 

King.  If  it  be  true. 

That  lady  had  been  better  have  embraced 

Cureless  diseases.     Get  you  to  your  rest : 

You  shall  be  righted. 

\Exeunt  Arethusa  and  Bellario. 
— Gentlemen,  draw  near  ; 

We  shall  employ  you.     Is  young  Pharamond        40 

Come  to  his  lodging  t 
Dion.  I  saw  him  enter  there. 

40 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  4. 

King.  Haste,  some  of  you,  and  cunningly  discover 

If  Megra  be  in  her  lodging.  \Exit. 

Cle.  Sir, 

She  parted  hence  but  now,  with  other  ladies. 

King.  If  she  be  there,  we  shall  not  need  to  make 
A  vain  discovery  of  our  suspicion. 
You  gods,  I  see  that  who  unrighteously 
Holds  wealth  or  state  from  others  shall  be  cursed 
In  that  which  meaner  men  are  blest  withal  : 
Ages  to  come  shall  know  no  male  of  him  50 

Left  to  inherit,  and  his  name  shall  be 
Blotted  from  earth  ;  if  he  have  any  child, 
It  shall  be  crossly  matched ;  the  gods  themselves 
Shall  sow  wild  strife  betwixt  her  lord  and  her. 
Yet,  if  it  be  your  wills,  forgive  the  sin 
I  have  committed  ;  let  it  not  fall 
Upon  this  understanding  child  of  mine  ! 
She  has  not  broke  your  laws.     But  how  can  I 
Look  to  be  heard  of  gods  that  must  be  just. 
Praying  upon  the  ground  I  hold  by  wrong  ?  60 

{Aside. 

Re-enter  Dion. 

Dion.  Sir,  I  have  asked,  and  her  women  swear  she  is 
within  ;  but  they,  I  think,  are  bawds.  I  told  'em,  I 
must  speak  with  her ;  they  laughed,  and  said,  their 
lady  lay  speechless.  I  said,  my  business  was  im- 
portant ;  they  said,  their  lady  was  about  it.  I  grew 
41 


ACT  II.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

hot,  and  cried,  my  business  was  a  matter  that  con- 
cerned life  and  death  ;  they  answered,  so  was  sleep- 
ing, at  which  their  lady  was.  I  urged  again,  she 
had  scarce  time  to  be  so  since  last  I  saw  her  :  they 
smiled  again,  and  seemed  to  instruct  me  that  sleep- 
ing was  nothing  but  lying  down  and  winking. 
Answers  more  direct  I  could  not  get :  in  short,  sir, 
I  think  she  is  not  there.  73 

Ki?ig.  'Tis  then  no  time  to  dally. — You  o'  the  guard, 


Wait  at  the  back  door  of  the  prince's  lod 


emsr 


OJ 


And  see  that  none  pass  thence,  upon  your  lives. — 

\Exeu7it  Guards. 
Knock,  gentlemen  ;  knock  loud  ;  louder  yet. 

\pion,  Clerefnonf,  etc.,  knock  at  the  door 
of  Pharamo7ids  lodgiiig. 
What,  has  their  pleasure  taken  off  their  hearing? 
I  '11  break  your  meditations. — Knock  again. — 
Not  yet  ?     I  do  not  think  he  sleeps,  having  this     80 
Larum  by  him. — Once  more. — Pharamond  !  prince  ! 
\Pharamond  appears  at  a  wmdow. 
Pha.  What  saucy  groom  knocks  at  this  dead  of  night  ? 
Where  be  our  waiters  ?     By  my  vexed  soul. 
He  meets  his  death  that  meets  me,  for  this  bold- 
ness. 
King.  Prince,  prince,  you  wrong  your  thoughts  ;  we  are 
your  friends  : 
Come  down. 
Pha.  The  King  ! 

42 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc  4. 

King.  The  same,  sir.     Come  down,  sir  : 

We  have  cause  of  present  counsel  with  you. 


Enter  P7ia7'amond  below. 

Pha.  If  your  grace  please 

To  use  me,  I  '11  attend  you  to  your  chamber. 
King.    No,  'tis  too  late,  prince  ;    I  '11   make  bold  with 
yours.  90 

Pha.  I  have  some  private  reasons  to  myself 

Makes  me  unmannerly,  and  say  you  cannot. — 

Nay,  press  not  forward,  gentlemen  ;  he  must 

Come  through  my  life  that  comes  here. 
King.  Sir,  be  resolved  I  must  and  will  come. — Enter  ! 
Pha.  I  will  not  be  dishonoured  : 

He  that  enters,  enters  upon  his  death. 

Sir,  'tis  a  sign  you  make  no  stranger  of  me, 

To  bring  these  renegadoes  to  my  chamber 

At  these  unseasoned  hours. 
Ki7tg.  Why  do  you  100 

Chafe  yourself  so  ?  you  are  not  wronged  nor  shall 
be ; 

Only  I  '11  search  your  lodging,  for  some  cause 

To  ourself  known. — Enter,  I  say. 
Pha.  I  say,  no.  \_Megra  appears  at  a  window. 

Meg.  Let  'em  enter,  prince,  let  'em  enter  ; 

I  am  up  and  ready  :  I  know  their  business  ; 

'Tis  the  poor  breaking  of  a  lady's  honour 
43 


ACT  II.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

They  hunt  so  hotly  after  ;  let  'em  enjoy  it. — 
You  have  your  business,  gentlemen  ;  I  lay  here. 
Oh,  my  lord  the  King,  this  is  not  noble  in  you, 
To  make  public  the  weakness  of  a  woman  ! 

King.  Comedown,    no 

Meg.    I    dare,   my  lord.       Your    hootings    and    your 
clamours, 
Your  private  whispers  and  your  broad  fleerings, 
Can  no  more  vex  my  soul  than  this  base  carriage  ; 
But  I  have  vengeance  yet  in  store  for  some 
Shall,  in  the  most  contempt  you  can  have  of  me. 
Be  joy  and  nourishment. 

King,  Will  you  come  down  ? 

Meg.  Yes,  to  laugh  at  your  worst;    but  I  shall  wring 
you. 
If  my  skill  fail  me  not.  {Exit  above. 

Kittg.  Sir,  I  must  dearly  chide  you  for  this  looseness  ; 
You  have  wronged  a  worthy  lady  :  but,  no  more. — 
Conduct  him  to  my  lodging  and  to  bed.  121 

\Exeunt  Pharmnond  and  Attendants. 

Cle.  Get  him  another  wench,  and  you  bring  him  to  bed 
indeed. 

Diojt.  'Tis  strange  a  man  cannot  ride  a  stage 

Or  two,  to  breathe  himself,  without  a  warrant. 
If  his  gear  hold^  that  lodgings  be  searched  thus. 
Pray  Heaven  we   may  lie  with   our  own  wives  in 

safety. 
That  they  be  not  by  some  trick  of  state  mistaken  1 
44 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  4. 

Enter  Megra  below. 

King.  Now,  lady  of  honour,  where 's  your  honour  now  ? 
No  man  can  fit  your  palate  but  the  prince  : 
Thou  most  ill-shrouded  rottenness,  thou  piece      130 
Made  by  a  painter  and  a  'pothecary, 
Thou  troubled  sea  of  lust,  thou  wilderness 
Inhabited  by  wild  thoughts,  thou  swoln  cloud 
Of  infection,  thou  ripe  mine  of  all  diseases, 
Thou  all-sin,  all-hell,  and  last  all-devils,  tell  me. 
Had  you  none  to  pull  on  with  your  courtesies 
But  he  that  must  be  mine,  and  wrong  my  daughter? 
By  all  the  gods,  all  these,  and  all  the  pages, 
And  all    the   court,   shall  hoot  thee  through   the 

court, 
Fling  rotten  oranges,  make  ribald  rhymes,  140 

And  sear  thy  name  with  candles  upon  walls  ! 
Do  you  laugh.  Lady  Venus  ? 

Meg.  Faith,  sir,  you  must  pardon  me  ; 

I  cannot  choose  but  laugh  to  see  you  merry. 
If  you  do  this,  O  King  !  nay,  if  you  dare  do  it, 
By  all  those  gods  you  swore  by,  and  as  many 
More  of  my  own,  I  will  have  fellows,  and  such 
Fellows  in  it,  as  shall  make  noble  mirth  ! 
The  princess,  your  dear  daughter,  shall  stand  by 

me 
On  walls,  and  sung  in  ballads,  any  thing  : 
Urge  me  no  more  ;  I  know  her  and  her  haunts,  1 50 
45 


ACT  II.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

Her  lays,  leaps,  and  outlays,  and  will  discover  all ; 
Nay,  will  dishonour  her.     I  know  the  boy 
She  keeps  ;  a  handsome  boy,  about  eighteen  ; 
Know  what  she  does  with  him,  where,  and  when. 
Come,  sir,  you  put  me  to  a  woman's  madness. 
The  glory  of  a  fury  ;  and  if  I  do  not 
Do 't  to  the  height 

King.  What  boy  is  this  she  raves  at  ? 

Meg.    Alas !  good-minded  prince,  you  know  not  these 
things ! 
I  am  loth  to  reveal  'em.     Keep  this  fault. 
As  you  would  keep  your  health  from  the  hot  air     160 
Of  the  corrupted  people,  or,  by  Heaven, 
I  will  not  fall  alone.     What  I  have  known 
Shall  be  as  public  as  a  print ;  all  tongues 
Shall  speak  it  as  they  do  the  language  they 
Are  born  in,  as  free  and  commonly  ;  I  '11  set  it, 
Like  a  prodigious  star,  for  all  to  gaze  at. 
And  so  high  and  glowing,  that  other  kingdoms  far 

and  foreign 
Shall  read  it  there,  nay,  travel  with  it,  till  they  find 
No  tongue  to  make  it  more,  nor  no  more  people  ; 
And  then  behold  the  fall  of  your  fair  princess  !     170 

King.  Has  she  a  boy  ? 

Cle.  So  please  your  grace,  I  have  seen  a  boy  wait  on  her, 
A  fair  boy. 

King.  Go,  get  you  to  your  quarter  : 

For  this  time  I  will  study  to  forget  you. 
46 


Philaster  act  ii.  sc.  4. 

Meg.  Do  you  study  to  forget  me,  and  I  '11  study 
To  forget  you. 

\Exeimt  King  and  Megra,  severally. 

Cle.  Why,  here's  a  male  spirit  fit  for  Hercules.  If  ever 
there  be  Nine  Worthies  of  women,  this  wench  shall 
ride  astride  and  be  their  captain.  179 

Dion.  Sure,  she  has  a  garrison  of  devils  in  her  tongue, 
she  uttered  such  balls  of  wild-fire  :  she  has  so 
nettled  the  King,  that  all  the  doctors  in  the  country 
will  scarce  cure  him.  That  boy  was  a  strange-found- 
out  antidote  to  cure  her  infection  ;  that  boy,  that 
princess'  boy ;  that  brave,  chaste,  virtuous  lady's 
boy  ;  and  a  fair  boy,  a  well-spoken  boy  !  All  these 
considered,  can  make  nothing  else — but  there  I 
leave  you,  gentlemen. 

Thra.  Nay,  we  '11  go  wander  with  you.  {Exeunt, 


47 


ACT  III.  sc.  I.  Philaster 


ACT    THE    THIRD 

SCENE  I 

The  Court  of  the  Palace. 
Enter  Dion,  Cleremojit,  and  Thrasilhie. 

Cle.  Nay,  doubtless,  'tis  true. 

Dion.  Ay  ;  and  'tis  the  gods 

That  raised  this  punishment,  to  scourge  the  King 
With  his  own  issue.     Is  it  not  a  shame 
For  us  that  should  write  noble  in  the  land, 
For  us  that  should  be  freemen,  to  behold 
A  man  that  is  the  bravery  of  his  age, 
Philaster,  pressed  down  from  his  royal  right 
By  this  regardless  King  ?  and  only  look 
And  see  the  sceptre  ready  to  be  cast 
Into  the  hands  of  that  lascivious  lady  lo 

That  lives  in  lust  with  a  smooth  boy,  now  to  be 

married 
To  yon  strange  prince,  who,  but  that  people  please 
To  let  him  be  a  prince,  is  born  a  slave 
In  that  which  should  be  his  most  noble  part, 
His  mind? 

48 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  i. 

Thra.  That  man  that  would  not  stir  with  you 

To  aid  Philaster,  let  the  gods  forget 
That  such  a  creature  walks  upon  the  earth ! 

Cle.  Philaster  is  too  backward  in't  himself. 
The  gentry  do  await  it,  and  the  people, 
Against  their  nature,  are  all  bent  for  him,  20 

And  like  a  field  of  standing  corn,  that 's  moved 
With  a  stiff  gale,  their  heads  bow  all  one  way. 

Dion.  The  only  cause  that  draws  Philaster  back 
From  this  attempt  is  the  fair  princess'  love. 
Which  he  admires,  and  we  can  now  confute. 

TJira.  Perhaps  he  '11  not  believe  it. 

Dion.  Why,  gentlemen, 

'Tis  without  question  so. 

Cle.  Ay,  'tis  past  speech, 

She  lives  dishonestly  :  but  how  shall  we, 
If  he  be  curious,  work  upon  his  faith? 

Thra.  We  all  are  satisfied  within  ourselves.  30 

Dioti.  Since  it  is  true,  and  tends  to  his  own  good, 
I  '11  make  this  new  report  to  be  my  knowledge  ; 
I  '11  say  I  know  it ;  nay,  I  '11  swear  I  saw  it. 

Cle.  It  will  be  best. 

Thra.  'Twill  move  him. 

Dion.  Here  he  comes. 

Enter  Philaster. 

Good  morrow  to  your  honour :  we  have  spent 
Some  time  in  seeking  you. 

D  49 


ACT  III.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

Phi.  My  worthy  friends, 

You  that  can  keep  your  memories  to  know 
Your  friend  in  miseries,  and  cannot  frown 
On  men  disgraced  for  virtue,  a  good  day 
Attend  you  all !     What  service  may  I  do  40 

Worthy  your  acceptation  ? 

Dion.  jMy  good  lord. 

We  come  to  urge  that  virtue,  which  we  know 
Lives   in   your  breast,   forth.      Rise,   and  make  a 

head  : 
The  nobles  and  the  people  are  all  dulled 
With  this  usurping  King  ;  and  not  a  man. 
That  ever  heard  the  word,  or  knew  such  a  thing 
As  virtue,  but  will  second  your  attempts. 

Phi.  How  honourable  is  this  love  in  you 

To    me    that    have   deserved    none !      Know,   my 

friends 
(You,  that  were  born  to  shame  your  poor  Philaster 
With  too  much  courtesy),  I  could  afford  51 

To  melt  myself  in  thanks  :  but  my  designs 
Are  not  yet  ripe  :  suffice  it,  that  ere  long 
I  shall  employ  your  loves  ;  but  yet  the  time 
Is  short  of  what  I  would. 

Dion.  The  time  is  fuller,  sir,  than  you  expect ; 

That     which     hereafter     will     not,     perhaps,     be 

reached 
By  violence    may  now    be    caught.      As  for    the 
King, 

50 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  i. 

You  know  the  people  have  long  hated  him  ; 

But  now  the  princess,  whom  they  loved 60 

Phi.  Why,  what  of  her  ? 

Dion.  Is  loathed  as  much  as  he. 

Phi.  By  what  strange  means  ? 

Dion.  She's  known  a  whore. 

Phi.  Thou  liest. 

Dio?t.  My  lord 

Phi.  Thou  liest. 

\Offers  to  draw  his  sword :  they  hold  him. 
And    thou    shalt    feel    it  !       I    had    thought    thy 

mind 
Had  been  of  honour.     Thus  to  rob  a  lady 
Of  her  good  name,  is  an  infectious  sin 
Not  to  be  pardoned  :  be  it  false  as  hell, 
'Twill  never  be  redeemed,  if  it  be  sown 
Amongst  the  people,  fruitful  to  increase 
All  evil  they  shall  hear.     Let  me  alone,  70 

That  I  may  cut  off  falsehood  whilst  it  springs  ! 
Set  hills  on  hills  betwixt  me  and  the  man 
That  utters  this,  and  I  will  scale  them  all, 
And  from  the  utmost  top  fall  on  his  neck, 
Like  thunder  from  a  cloud. 

Dion.  This  is  most  strange  : 

Sure,  he  does  love  her. 

Phi.  I  do  love  fair  truth  : 

She  is  my  mistress,  and  who  injures  her 
Draws  vengeance  from  me.     Sirs,  let  go  my  arms. 
51 


ACT  III.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

Thra.  Nay,  good  my  lord,  be  patient. 

Cle.  Sir,  remember  this  is  your  honoured  friend,  80 

That  comes  to  do  his  service,  and  will  show  you 

Why  he  uttered  this. 
PJii.  I  ask  you  pardon,  sir  ; 

My  zeal  to  truth  made  me  unmannerly  : 

Should  I  have  heard  dishonour  spoke  of  you, 

Behind  your  back,  untruly,  I  had  been 

As  much  distempered  and  enraged  as  now. 
Dion.  But  this,  my  lord,  is  truth. 
Phi.  Oh,  say  not  so  I 

Good  sir,  forbear  to  say  so  ;  'tis  then  truth. 

That  all  womankind  is  false  :  urge  it  no  more ; 

It  is  impossible.     Why  should  you  think  90 

The  princess  light  ? 
Dion.  Why,  she  was  taken  at  it. 

PJii.    'Tis    false !    by    Heaven,    'tis    false  !     it    cannot 
be! 

Can  it  ?      Speak,   gentlemen ;    for  love   of   truth, 
speak  ! 

Is't  possible?     Can  women  all  be  damned.? 
Dion.  Why,  no,  my  lord. 

Phi.  Why,  then,  it  cannot  be. 

Dion.  And  she  was  taken  with  her  boy. 
Phi.  What  boy .? 

Dion.  A  page,  a  boy  that  serves  her. 
Phi.  Oh,  good  gods  ! 

A  little  boy  ? 

52 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  i. 

Dion.  Ay  ;  know  you  him,  my  lord  ? 

Phi.  Hell  and  sin   know  him  !    [Aside.] — Sir,  you  are 
deceived ; 
I  '11  reason  it  a  little  coldly  with  you  :  lOO 

If  she  were  lustful,  would  she  take  a  boy, 
That  knows  not  yet  desire  ?  she  would  have  one 
Should  meet  her  thoughts  and  know  the  sin  he 

acts, 
Which  is  the  great  delight  of  wickedness. 
You  are  abused,  and  so  is  she,  and  I. 
Dion.  How  you,  my  lord  ? 
PM.  Why,  all  the  world 's  abused 

In  an  unjust  report. 
Dion.  Oh,  noble  sir,  your  virtues 

Cannot  look  into  the  subtle  thoughts  of  woman  ! 
In  short,  my  lord,  I  took  them  ;  I  myself. 
P/ii.   Now,  all   the  devils,  thou   didst !     Fly  from  my 
rage!  no 

Would  thou  hadst  ta'en  devils  engendering  plagues, 
When  thou  didst  take  them  !     Hide  thee  from  my 

eyes  ! 
Would  thou  hadst  taken  thunder  on  thy  breast, 
When   thou   didst   take   them ;    or  been   strucken 

dumb 
For  ever  ;  that  this  foul  deed  might  have  slept 
In  silence  ! 
T/ira.  Have  you  known  him  so  ill-tempered  ? 

Cie.  Never  before. 

53 


ACT  III.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

Phi.  The  winds,  that  are  let  loose 

From  the  four  several  corners  of  the  earth, 
And  spread  themselves  all  over  sea  and  land, 
Kiss  not  a  chaste  one.     What  friend  bears  a  sword 
To  run  me  through  ? 

Dion.  Why,  my  lord,  are  you     121 

So  moved  at  this  ? 

Phi.  When  any  fall  from  virtue, 

I  am  distract ;  I  have  an  interest  in 't. 

Dion.  But,  good  my  lord,  recall  yourself,  and  think 
What's  best  to  be  done. 

Phi.  I  thank  you  ;  I  will  do  it : 

Please  you  to  leave  me  ;  I  '11  consider  of  it. 
To-morrow  I  will  find  your  lodging  forth, 
And  give  you  answer. 

Dion.  All  the  gods  direct  you 

The  readiest  way  ! 

Thru.  He  was  extreme  impatient. 

Cle.  It  was  his  virtue  and  his  noble  mind.  130 

{^Exeunt  Dion^  Cleremont^  and  Thrasiline, 

Phi.   I  had  forgot  to  ask  him  where  he  took  them  ; 
I  '11  follow  him.     Oh,  that  I  had  a  sea 
Within  my  breast,  to  quench  the  fire  I  feel ! 
More  circumstances  will  but  fan  this  fire  : 
It  more  afflicts  me  now,  to  know  by  whom 
This  deed  is  done,  than  simply  that  'tis  done  ; 
And  he  that  tells  me  this  is  honourable, 
As  far  from  lies  as  she  is  far  from  truth. 
54 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  i. 

Oh  that,  like  beasts,  we  could  not  grieve  ourselves 
With  that  we  see  not !    Bulls  and  rams  will  fight 
To  keep  their  females,  standing  in  their  sight ;    141 
But  take  'em  from  them,  and  you  take  at  once 
Their  spleens  away  ;  and  they  will  fall  again 
Unto  their  pastures,  growing  fresh  and  fat ; 
And  taste  the  water  of  the  springs  as  sweet 
As  'twas  before,  finding  no  start  in  sleep  : 
But  miserable  man 

Enter  Bellario. 

See,  see,  you  gods, 
He  walks  still ;  and  the  face  you  let  him  wear 
When  he  was  innocent  is  still  the  same, 
Not  blasted  !     Is  this  justice  ?  do  you  mean        150 
To  intrap  mortality,  that  you  allow 
Treason  so  smooth  a  brow  ?     I  cannot  now 
Think  he  is  guilty.  \Aside, 

Bel.  Health  to  you,  my  lord  ! 

The  princess  doth  commend  her  love,  her  life. 
And  this,  unto  you.  \Gives  a  letter. 

Phi.  Oh  Bellario, 

Now  I  perceive  she  loves  me  !  she  does  show  it 
In  loving  thee,  my  boy  :  she  has  made  thee  brave. 

Bel.  My  lord,  she  has  attired  me  past  my  wish, 
Past  my  desert  ;  more  fit  for  her  attendant, 
Though  far  unfit  for  me  who  do  attend.  160 

Phi.  Thou  art  grown  courtly,  boy. — Oh,  let  all  women, 
55 


ACT  III.  sc. ..  Philaster 

That  love  black  deeds,  learn  to  dissemble  here, 

Here,  by  this  paper !     She  does  write  to  me 

As  if  her  heart  were  mines  of  adamant 

To  all  the  world  besides  ;  but,  unto  me, 

A  maiden-snow  that  melted  with  my  looks. — 

[Aside. 
Tell  me,  my  boy,  how  doth  the  princess  use  thee? 
For  I  shall  guess  her  love  to  me  by  that. 

Be/.  Scarce  like  her  servant,  but  as  if  I  were 

Something  allied  to  her,  or  had  preserved  170 

Her  life  three  times  by  my  fidelity  ; 
As  mothers  fond  do  use  their  only  sons, 
As  I  'd  use  one  that 's  left  unto  my  trust, 
For  whom  my  life  should  pay  if  he  met  harm, 
So  she  does  use  me. 

P/ii.  Why,  this  is  wondrous  well : 

But  what  kind  language  does  she  feed  thee  with  ? 

Bel.  Why,  she  does  tell  me  she  will  trust  my  youth 
With  all  her  loving  secrets,  and  does  call  me 
Her  pretty  servant ;  bids  me  weep  no  more 
For  leaving  you  ;  she'll  see  my  services  180 

Regarded  :  and  such  words  of  that  soft  strain, 
That  I  am  nearer  weeping  when  she  ends 
Than  ere  she  spake. 

P/ii.  This  is  much  better  still. 

Bel.  Are  you  not  ill,  my  lord  ? 

F/a.  111?  no,  Bellario. 

Bel.  Methinks  your  words 

56 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  i. 

Fall  not  from  off  your  tongue  so  evenly, 
Nor  is  there  in  your  looks  that  quietness 
That  I  was  wont  to  see. 

riii.  Thou  art  deceived,  boy  : 

And  she  strokes  thy  head  ? 

Bel.  Yes. 

Phi.  And  she  does  clap  thy  cheeks? 

Bel.  She  does,  my  lord. 

PJii  And  she  does  kiss,  thee  boy?  ha! 

Bel.  How,  my  lord  ? 

Phi.  She  kisses  thee  ? 

Bel.  Not  so,  my  lord. 

Phi.  That 's  strange  ! — I  know  she  does. 

Bel.  No,  by  my  life. 

Phi.  Why  then  she  does  not  love  me.     Come,  she  does. 
I  bade  her  do  it ;  I  charged  her,  by  all  charms    194 
Of  love  between  us,  by  the  hope  of  peace 
We  should  enjoy,  to  yield  thee  all  delights 
Naked  as  to  her  bed  ;  I  took  her  oath 
Thou  shouldst  enjoy  her.     Tell  me,  gentle  boy 
Is  she  not  parallelless?  is  not  her  breath 
Sweet  as  Arabian  winds  when  fruits  are  ripe.''      200 
Are  not  her  breasts  two  liquid  ivory  bails  .? 
Is  she  not  all  a  lasting  mine  of  joy.? 

Bel.  Ay,  now  I  see  why  my  disturbed  thoughts 
Were  so  perplexed  :  when  first  I  went  to  her, 
My  heart  held  augury.     You  are  abused  ; 
Some  villain  has  abused  you  :  I  do  see 
57 


ACT  III.  sc.  I.  Philaster 

Whereto  you  tend.     Fall  rocks  upon  his  head 
That  put  this  to  you  !  'tis  some  subtle  train 
To  bring  that  noble  frame  of  yours  to  nought. 

Phi.  Thou  think'st  I  will  be  angry  with  thee.     Come, 
Thou  shalt  know  all  my  drift  :  I  hate  her  more  201 
Than  I  love  happiness,  and  placed  thee  there 
To  pry  with  narrow  eyes  into  her  deeds. 
Hast  thou  discovered  ?  is  she  fallen  to  lust, 
As  I  would  wish  her?      Speak   some  comfort   to 
me. 

Bel.  My  lord,  you  did  mistake  the  boy  you  sent : 
Had  she  the  lust  of  sparrows  or  of  goats, 
Had  she  a  sin  that  way,  hid  from  the  world, 
Beyond  the  name  of  lust,  I  would  not  aid 
Her  base  desires  :  but  what  I  came  to  know        220 
As  servant  to  her,  I  would  not  reveal, 
To  make  my  Hfe  last  ages. 

PJii.  Oh,  my  heart ! 

This  is  a  salve  worse  than  the  main  disease. 
Tell  me  thy  thoughts  ;  for  I  will  know  the  least 

{Draws  his  sword. 
That  dwells  within  thee,  or  will  rip  thy  heart 
To  know  it :  I  will  see  thy  thoughts  as  plain 
As  I  do  now  thy  face. 

Bel.  Why,  so  you  do. 

She  is  (for  aught  I  know)  by  all  the  gods,     [Kneels. 
As  chaste  as  ice  !  but  were  she  foul  as  hell, 
And  I  did  know  it  thus,  the  breath  of  kings,        230 
«;8 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  r. 

The  points  of  swords,  tortures,  nor  bulls  of  brass, 

Should  draw  it  from  me. 
Phi.  Then  it  is  no  time 

To  dally  with  thee  ;  I  will  take  thy  life, 

For  I  do  hate  thee  :  I  could  curse  thee  now, 
Bel.  If  you  do  hate,  you  could  not  curse  me  worse  ; 

The  gods  have  not  a  punishment  in  store 

Greater  for  me  than  is  your  hate. 
Phi.  Fie,  fie, 

So  young  and  so  dissembling  1     Tell  me  when 

And  where  thou  didst  enjoy  her,  or  let  plagues 

Fall  on  me,  if  I  destroy  thee  not !  240 

Bel.  By  Heaven  I  never  did ;  and  when  I  lie 

To  save  my  life,  may  I  live  long  and  loathed  ! 

Hew  me  asunder,  and,  whilst  I  can  think, 

I  '11  love  those  pieces  you  have  cut  away 

Better  than  those  that  grow,  and  kiss  those  limbs 

Because  you  made  'em  so. 
Phi.  Fear'st  thou  not  death? 

Can  boys  contemn  that  ? 
Bel.  Oh,  what  boy  is  he 

Can  be  content  to  live  to  be  a  man, 

That  sees  the  best  of  men  thus  passionate. 

Thus  without  reason  ? 
Phi.  Oh,  but  thou  dost  not  know 

What  'tis  to  die. 
Bel.  Yes,  I  do  know,  my  lord :  251 

'Tis  less  than  to  be  born  ;  a  lasting  sleep  ; 
59 


ACT  III.  sc.  1.  Philaster 

A  quiet  resting  from  all  jealousy, 

A  thing  we  all  pursue  ;  I  know,  besides. 

It  is  but  giving  over  of  a  game 

That  must  be  lost. 

Phi.  But  there  are  pains,  false  boy, 

For  perjured  souls  :  think  but  on  these,  and  then 
Thy  heart  will  melt,  and  thou  wilt  utter  all. 

Bel.  May  they  fall  all  upon  me  whilst  I  live, 

If  I  be  perjured,  or  have  ever  thought  260 

Of  that  you  charge  me  with  !     If  I  be  false. 
Send  me  to  suffer  in  those  punishments 
You  speak  of;  kill  me  ! 

Phi.  Oh,  what  should  I  do  ? 

Why,  who  can  but  believe  him  ?  he  does  swear 
So  earnestly,  that  if  it  were  not  true, 
The  gods  would  not  endure  him.  [^Sheathes  his  sword. 
Rise,  Bellario  :  \Bellario  rises. 

Thy  protestations  are  so  deep,  and  thou 
Dost  look  so  truly  when  thou  utter'st  them. 
That,  though  I  know  'em  false  as  were  my  hopes, 
I  cannot  urge  thee  further.     But  thou  wert  270 

To  blame  to  injure  me,  for  I  must  love 
Thy  honest  looks,  and  take  no  revenge  upon 
Thy  tender  youth  :  a  love  from  me  to  thee 
Is  firm,  whate'er  thou  dost :  it  troubles  me 
That  I  have  called  the  blood  out  of  thy  cheeks. 
That  did  so  well  become  thee.     But,  good  boy. 
Let  me  not  see  thee  more  :  something  is  done 
60 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  =. 

That  will  distract  me,  that  will  make  me  mad, 
If  I  behold  thee.     If  thou  tender'st  me, 
Let  me  not  see  thee. 

Bel.  I  will  fly  as  far  280 

As  there  is  morning,  ere  I  give  distaste 
To  that  most  honoured  mind.     But  through  these 

tears, 
Shed  at  my  hopeless  parting,  I  can  see 
A  world  of  treason  practised  upon  you, 
And  her,  and  me.     Farewell  for  evermore  ! 
If  you  shall  hear  that  sorrow  struck  me  dead, 
And  after  find  me  loyal,  let  there  be 
A  tear  shed  from  you  in  my  memory, 
And  I  shall  rest  at  peace. 

Phi.  Blessing  be  with  thee, 

Whatever    thou    deserv'st !     {Exit  Bellario.l — Oh, 
where  shall  I  290 

Go  bathe  this  body?     Nature  too  unkind. 
That  made  no  medicine  for  a  troubled  mind  ! 

[Exit. 

SCENE  II 
Ayeihusd!s  Apartment  in  the  Palace. 

Enter  Arethusa. 

Are.  I  marvel  my  boy  comes  not  back  again  : 
But  that  I  know  my  love  will  question  him 
61 


ACT  III.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Over  and  over, — how  I  slept,  v^^aked,  talked, 
How  I  remembered  him  when  his  dear  name 
Was  last  spoke,  and  how  when  I  sighed,  wept,  sung, 
And  ten  thousand  such, — I  should  be  angry  at  his 
stay. 

Enter  Ki?ig. 

Kmg.  What,  at  your  meditations  !     Who  attends  you? 
Are.  None  but  my  single  self  :  I  need  no  guard  ; 

I  do  no  wrong,  nor  fear  none. 
King.  Tell  me,  have  you  not  a  boy  ? 
Are.  Yes,  sir.  lo 

King.  What  kind  of  boy  ? 

Are.  A  page,  a  waiting-boy. 

Ki?ig.  A  handsome  boy  ? 
Are.  I  think  he  be  not  ugly  : 

Well  qualified  and  dutiful  I  know  him  ; 

I  took  him  not  for  beauty. 
King.  He  speaks  and  sings  and  plays  ? 
Are.  Yes,  sir. 

Ki?ig.  About  eighteen  ? 

Are.  I  never  asked  his  age. 

King.  Is  he  full  of  service  ? 

Are.  By  your  pardon,  why  do  you  ask  ? 
Ki7ig.  Put  him  away. 
Are,  Sir ! 

King.  Put  him  away,  I  say. 

H'as  done  you  that  good  service  shames   me   to 
speak  of.  20 

62 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  ». 

Are.  Good  sir,  let  me  understand  you. 

Ki?tg.  If  you  fear  me, 

Show  it  in  duty  ;  put  away  that  boy. 

Are.  Let  me  have  reason  for  it,  sir,  and  then 
Your  will  is  my  command. 

King.  Do  not  you  blush  to  ask  it  ?     Cast  him  off, 
Or  I  shall  do  the  same  to  you.     You're  one 
Shame  with  me,  and  so  near  unto  myself, 
That,  by  my  life,  I  dare  not  tell  myself 
What  you,  myself,  have  done. 

Are.  What  I  have  done,  my  lord? 

King.  'Tis  a  new  language,  that  all  love  to  learn  :         30 
The  common  people  speak  it  well  already ; 
They  need  no  grammar.     Understand  me  well ; 
There  be  foul  whispers  stirring.     Cast  him  off, 
And  suddenly  :  do  it !     Farewell.  {Exit. 

Are  Where  may  a  maiden  live  securely  free, 

Keeping  her  honour  fair  ?     Not  with  the  living  ; 

They  feed  upon  opinions,  errors,  dreams, 

And  make  'em  truths  ;  they  draw  a  nourishment 

Out  of  defamings,  grow  upon  disgraces  ; 

And,  when  they  see  a  virtue  fortified  40 

Strongly  above  the  battery  of  their  tongues, 

Oh,  how  they  cast  to  sink  it !  and,  defeated 

(Soul-sick  with  poison),  strike  the  monuments 

Where  noble  names  lie  sleeping,  till  they  sweat, 

And  the  cold  marble  melt. 


ACT  III.  sc.  2,  Philaster 

Enter  Philaster. 

Phi.  Peace  to  your  fairest  thoughts,  dearest  mistress  ! 

Are.  Ohj  my  dearest  servant,  I  have  a  war  within  me  ! 

PJii.  He  must  be  more  than  man   that  makes  these 
crystals 
Run  into  rivers.     Sweetest  fair,  the  cause  ? 
And,  as  I  am  your  slave,  tied  to  your  goodness,    50 
Your  creature,  made  again  from  what  I  was 
And  newly-spirited,  I  '11  right  your  honour. 

Are.  Oh,  my  best  love,  that  boy  ! 

Phi.  What  boy  ? 

Are.  The  pretty  boy  you  gave  me 

Phi.  What  of  him  ? 

Are.  Must  be  no  more  mine. 

Phi.  Why? 

Ai'c.  They  are  jealous  of  him. 

Phi.  Jealous  !  who  ? 

Are.  The  King. 

Phi.  Oh,  my  misfortune  I 

Then  'tis  no  idle  jealousy.  \Aside.'\ — Let  him  go. 

Are.  Oh,  cruel  I 

Are  you  hard-hearted  too  ?  who  shall  now  tell  you 
How  much  I  loved  you  ?   who  shall  swear  it  to  you, 
And  weep  the  tears  I  send  ?   who  shall  now  bring 
you  61 

Letters,  rings,  bracelets  ?  lose  his  health  in  service? 
Wake  tedious  nights  in  stories  of  your  praise  ? 
64 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  a. 

Who  shall  now  sing  your  crying  elegies, 

And  strike  a  sad  soul  into  senseless  pictures, 

And  make  them  mourn  ?  who  shall  take  up  his  lute, 

And  touch  it  till  he  crown  a  silent  sleep 

Upon  my  eyelids,  making  me  dream,  and  cry, 

*  Oh,  my  dear,  dear  Philaster  ! ' 

Phi.  Oh,  my  heart ! 

Would  he  had  broken  thee,  that  made  me  know 
This  lady  was  not  loyal !  \Aside.'\ — Mistress,         71 
Forget  the  boy  ;  I  '11  get  thee  a  far  better. 

Are.  Oh,  never,  never  such  a  boy  again 
As  my  Bellario  ! 

Phi.  'Tis  but  your  fond  affection. 

Are.  With  thee,  my  boy,  farewell  for  ever 
All  secrecy  in  servants  !     Farewell  faith, 
And  all  desire  to  do  well  for  itself ! 
Let  all  that  shall  succeed  thee  for  thy  wrongs 
Sell  and  betray  chaste  love  ! 

Phi.  And  all  this  passion  for  a  boy? 

Are.  He  was  your  boy,  and  you  put  him  to  me, 

And  the  loss  of  such  must  have  a  mourning  for.    80 

Phi.  Oh,  thou  forgetful  woman  ! 

Are.  How,  my  lord  ? 

Phi.  False  Arethusa ! 

Hast  thou  a  medicine  to  restore  my  wits, 
When  I  have  lost  'em  ?     If  not,  leave  to  talk. 
And  do  thus. 

Are.  Do  what,  sir?  would  you  sleep  ? 

E  65 


ACT  III.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Phi.  For  ever,  Arethusa.     Oh,  you  gods, 

Give  me  a  vi^orthy  patience  !     Have  I  stood 
Naked,  alone,  the  shock  of  many  fortunes  ? 
Have  I  seen  mischiefs  numberless  and  mighty 
Grow  like  a  sea  upon  me  ?     Have  I  taken  90 

Danger  as  stern  as  death  into  my  bosom, 
And  laughed  upon  it,  made  it  but  a  mirth, 
And  flung  it  by?     Do  I  live  now  like  him. 
Under  this  tyrant  King,  that  languishing 
Hears  his  sad  bell  and  sees  his  mourners?     Do  I 
Bear  all  this  bravely,  and  must  sink  at  length 
Under  a  woman's  falsehood  ?     Oh,  that  boy, 
That  cursed  boy  !     None  but  a  villain  boy 
To  ease  your  lust  ? 

Are.  Nay,  then,  I  am  betrayed  ; 

I  feel  the  plot  cast  for  my  overthrow.  100 

Oh,  I  am  wretched  ! 

Phi.  Now  you  may  take  that  little  right  I  have 
To  this  poor  kingdom  :  give  it  to  your  joy  ; 
For  I  have  no  joy  in  it.  Some  far  place. 
Where  never  womankind  durst  set  her  foot 
For  bursting  with  her  poisons,  must  I  seek, 
And  live  to  curse  you  : 

There  dig  a  cave,  and  preach  to  birds  and  beasts 
What  woman  is,  and  help  to  save  them  from  you  ; 
How  heaven  is  in  your  eyes,  but  in  your  hearts    no 
More  hell  than  hell  has  ;   how  your  tongues,  like 
scorpions, 

66 


Philaster  act  hi,  sc.  2. 

Both  heal  and   poison  ;    how  your  thoughts   are 

woven 
With  thousand  changes  in  one  subtle  web, 
And  worn  so  by  you  ;  how  that  foolish  man, 
That  reads  the  story  of  a  woman's  face 
And  dies  believing  it,  is  lost  for  ever  ; 
How  all  the  good  you  have  is  but  a  shadow, 
r  the  morning  with  you,  and  at  night  behind  you 
Past  and  forgotten  ;  how  your  vows  are  frosts, 
Fast  for  a  night,  and  with  the  next  sun  gone  ;      120 
How  you  are,  being  taken  all  together, 
A  mere  confusion,  and  so  dead  a  chaos, 
That  love  cannot  distinguish.     These  sad  texts, 
Till  my  last  hour,  I  am  bound  to  utter  of  you. 
So,  farewell  all  my  woe,  all  my  delight !  [Exit. 

Are.  Be  merciful,  ye  gods,  and  strike  me  dead  ! 

What  way  have  I  deserved  this  ?     Make  my  breast 
Transparent  as  pure  crystal,  that  the  world. 
Jealous  of  me,  may  see  the  foulest  thought 
My  heart  holds.     Where  shall  a  woman  turn  her 

eyes,  130 

To  find  out  constancy  ? 

Enter  Bellario. 

Save  me,  how  black 
And  guiltily,  methinks,  that  boy  looks  now  ! 
Oh,  thou  dissembler,  that,  before  thou  spak'st 
Wert  in  thy  cradle  false,  sent  to  make  lies 
67 


ACT  III.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

And  betray  innocents  !     Thy  lord  and  thou 

May  glory  in  the  ashes  of  a  maid 

Fooled  by  her  passion  ;  but  the  conquest  is 

Nothing  so  great  as  wicked.     Fly  away ! 

Let  my  command  force  thee  to  that  which  shame 

Would  do  without  it.     If  thou  understood'st         140 

The  loathed  office  thou  hast  undergone, 

Why,  thou  wouldst  hide  thee  under  heaps  of  hills, 

Lest  men  should  dig  and  find  thee. 

Bel.  Oh,  what  God, 

Angry  with  men,  hath  sent  this  strange  disease 
Into  the  noblest  minds  !     Madam,  this  grief 
You  add  unto  me  is  no  more  than  drops 
To  seas,  for  which  they  are  not  seen  to  swell  ; 
My  lord  hath  struck  his  anger  through  my  heart, 
And  let  out  all  the  hope  of  future  joys. 
You  need  not  bid  me  fly  ;  I  came  to  part,  150 

To  take  my  latest  leave.     Farewell  for  ever  ! 
I  durst  not  run  away  in  honesty 
From  such  a  lady,  like  a  boy  that  stole 
Or  made  some  grievous  fault.     The  power  of  gods 
Assist  you  in  your  sufferings  !     Hasty  time 
Reveal  the  truth  to  your  abused  lord 
And  mine,  that  he  may  know  your  worth ;  whilst  I 
Go  seek  out  some  forgotten  place  to  die  ! 

\Exit  Bellario. 

Ai'e.  Peace  guide   thee  1      Thou  hast   overthrown   me 
once ; 

68 


Philaster  act  hi.  sc.  2. 

Yet,  if  I  had  another  Troy  to  lose,  160  ■ 

Thou,  or  another  villain  with  thy  looks, 
Might  talk  me  out  of  it,  and  send  me  naked. 
My  hair  dishevelled,  through  the  fiery  streets. 

Enter  a  Lady. 

Lady.  Madam,  the  King  would  hunt,  and  calls  for  you 
With  earnestness. 

Arc.  I  am  in  tune  to  hunt ! 

Diana,  if  thou  canst  rage  with  a  maid 
As  with  a  man,  let  me  discover  thee 
Bathing,  and  turn  me  to  a  fearful  hind, 
That  I  may  die  pursued  by  cruel  hounds, 
And  have  my  story  written  in  my  wounds  !  170 

\Exeunt. 


69 


ACT  IV.  sc.  1.  Philaster 


ACT   THE   FOURTH 

SCENE  I 

Before  the  Palace. 

Enter  King.,  Phara7?iond,   Aretkusa,    Galatea,   Megra, 
Dion,  Cleremont,  Thrasiline,  ajid  Attendants. 

King.  What,  are  the  hounds  before  and  all  the  wood- 
men, 
Our  horses  ready  and  our  bows  bent  ? 

Dion.  All,  sir. 

King.  You  are  cloudy,  sir  :    come,  we  have  forgotten 

[^To  Pharamond. 
Your  venial  trespass  ;  let  not  that  sit  heavy 
Upon  your  spirit ;  here 's  none  dare  utter  it. 

Dion.  He  looks  like  an  old  surfeited  stallion  after  his 
leaping,  dull  as  a  dormouse.  See  how  he  sinks  ! 
The  Avench  has  shot  him  between  wind  and  water, 
and,  I  hope,  sprung  a  leak.  9 

Thra.  He  needs  no  teaching,  he  strikes  sure  enough  : 
his  greatest  fault  is,  he  hunts  too  much  in  the 
purlieus  ;  would  he  would  leave  off  poaching  ! 

Dion.  And  for  his  horn,  h'as  left  it  at  the  lodge  where 
70 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  x, 

he  lay  late.  Oh,  he 's  a  precious  limehound  !  turn 
him  loose  upon  the  pursuit  of  a  lady,  and  if  he  lose 
her,  hang  him  up  i'  the  slip.  When  my  fox-bitch 
Beauty  grows  proud,  I  '11  borrow  him.  17 

King.  Is  your  boy  turned  away  ? 

Are.  You  did  command,  sir, 

And  I  obeyed  you. 

King.  'Tis  well  done.     Hark  ye  further. 

\They  talk  apart. 

Cle.  Is't  possible  this  fellow  should  repent?  methinks, 
that  were  not  noble  in  him  ;  and  yet  he  looks  like  a 
mortified  member,  as  if  he  had  a  sick  man's  salve 
in's  mouth.  If  a  worse  man  had  done  this  fault 
now,  some  physical  justice  or  other  would  presently 
(without  the  help  of  an  almanack)  have  opened  the 
obstructions  of  his  liver,  and  let  him  blood  with  a 
dog-whip.  27 

Dion.  See,  see  how  modestly  yon  lady  looks,  as  if  she 
came  from  churching  with  her  neighbour  !  Why, 
what  a  devil  can  a  man  see  in  her  face  but  that  she 's 
honest ! 

Tkra.  Faith,  no  great  matter  to  speak  of;  a  foolish 
twinkling  with  the  eye,  that  spoils  her  coat ;  but  he 
must  be  a  cunning  herald  that  finds  it. 

Dion.  See  how  they  muster  one  another  !     Oh,  there  's 

a  rank  regiment  where  the  devil  carries  the  colours 

and  his  dam  drum-major  !  now  the  world  and  the 

flesh  come  behind  with  the  carriage.  38 

71 


ACT  IV.  sc.  1.  Philaster 

Cle.  Sure  this  lady  has  a  good  turn  done  her  against  her 
will ;  before  she  was  common  talk,  now  none  dare 
say  cantharides  can  stir  her.  Her  face  looks  like  a 
warrant,  willing  and  commanding  all  tongues,  as 
they  will  answer  it,  to  be  tied  up  and  bolted  when 
this  lady  means  to  let  herself  loose.  As  I  live,  she 
has  got  her  a  goodly  protection  and  a  gracious ;  and 
may  use  her  body  discreetly  for  her  health's  sake, 
once  a  week,  excepting  Lent  and  dog-days.  Oh,  if 
they  were  to  be  got  for  money,  what  a  large  sum 
would  come  out  of  the  city  for  these  licences  !        49 

King.  To  horse,  to  horse  !  we  lose  the  morning,  gentle- 
men. \Exeunt. 


SCENE  II 
A  Forest. 

Enter  two  Woodmen. 

First  Wood.  What,  have  you  lodged  the  deer? 
Second  Wood.  Yes,  they  are  ready  for  the  bow. 
First  Wood.  Who  shoots  ? 
Second  Wood.  The  princess. 
First  Wood.  No,  she  '11  hunt. 
Second  Wood.  She  '11  take  a  stand,  I  say. 
First  Wood.  Who  else  ? 

Second  Wood.  Why,  the  young  stranger-prince. 
72 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  %. 

First  Wood.  He  shall  shoot  in  a  stone-bow  for  me.  I 
never  loved  his  beyond-sea-ship  since  he  forsook 
the  say,  for  paying  ten  shillings.  He  was  there 
at  the  fall  of  a  deer,  and  would  needs  (out  of  his 
mightiness)  give  ten  groats  for  the  dowcets ;  marry, 
his  steward  would  have  the  velvet-head  into  the 
bargain,  to  turf  his  hat  withal.  I  think  he  should 
love  venery  ;  he  is  an  old  Sir  Tristrem  ;  for,  if  you 
be  remembered,  he  forsook  the  stag  once  to  strike 
a  rascal  milking  in  a  meadow,  and  her  he  killed  in 
the  eye.  Who  shoots  else  ? 
Second  Wood.  The  Lady  Galatea.  20 

FtJ'-st  Wood.  That's  a  good  wench,  an  she  would  not 
chide  us  for  tumbling  of  her  women  in  the  brakes. 
She 's  liberal,  and,  by  the  gods,  they  say  she's  honest ; 
and  whether  that  be  a  fault,  I  have  nothing  to  do. 
There 's  all  ? 
Second  Wood.  No,  one  more  ;  Megra.  26 

First  Wood.  That's  a  firkeri' faith,  boy  ;  there 's  a  wench 
will  ride  her  haunches  as  hard  after  a  kennel  of 
hounds  as  a  hunting-saddle,  and  when  she  comes 
home,  get  'em  clapt,  and  all  is  well  again.  I  have 
known  her  lose  herself  three  times  in  one  afternoon 
(if  the  woods  have  been  answerable),  and  it  has 
been  work  enough  for  one  man  to  find  her,  and  he 
has  sweat  for  it.  She  rides  well  and  she  pays  well. 
Hark  !  let's  go.  [Exeunt. 


73 


ACT  IV.  sc.  a.  Philaster 

Enter  Philaster. 

Phi.  Oh  that  I  had  been  nourished  in  these  woods 
With  milk  of  goats  and  acorns,  and  not  known 
The  right  of  crowns  nor  the  dissembling  trains 
Of  women's  looks  ;  but  digged  myself  a  cave 
Where  I,  my  fire,  my  cattle,  and  my  bed,  40 

Might  have  been  shut  together  in  one  shed  ; 
And  then  had  taken  me  some  mountain-girl, 
Beaten  with  winds,  chaste  as  the  hardened  rocks 
Whereon  she  dwelt,  that  might  have  strewed  my  bed 
With  leaves  and  reeds,  and  with  the  skins  of  beasts, 
Our  neighbours,  and  have  borne  at  her  big  breasts 
My  large  coarse  issue  1     This  had  been  a  life 
Free  from  vexation. 

Enter  Bellario. 

Bel.  Oh,  wicked  men  ! 

An  innocent  may  walk  safe  among  beasts  ; 
Nothing  assaults  me  here.     See,  my  grieved  lord 
Sits  as  his  soul  were  searching  out  a  way  51 

To  leave  his  body  !  [Aside.] — Pardon  me,  that  must 
Break  thy  last  commandment ;  for  I  must  speak  : 
You  that  are  grieved  can  pity  ;  hear,  my  lord  ! 

Phi.  Is  there  a  creature  yet  so  miserable, 
That  I  can  pity  ? 

Pel.  Oh,  my  noble  lord, 

View  my  strange  fortune,  and  bestow  on  me, 
74 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  z. 

According  to  your  bounty  (if  my  service 

Can  merit  nothing),  so  much  as  may  serve 

To  keep  that  little  piece  I  hold  of  life  60 

From  cold  and  hunger  ! 
Phi.  Is  it  thou?  be  gone  ! 

Go,  sell  those  misbeseeming  clothes  thou  wear^st, 

And  feed  thyself  with  them. 
Bel.  Alas,  my  lord,  I  can  get  nothing  for  them  I 

The  silly  country-people  think  'tis  treason 

To  touch  such  gay  things. 
Phi.  Now,  by  the  gods,  this  is 

Unkindly  done,  to  vex  me  with  thy  sight. 

Thou  'rt  fallen  again  to  thy  dissembling  trade  : 

How  shouldst  thou  think  to  cozen  me  again? 

Remains  there  yet  a  plague  untried  for  me  ?  70 

Even  so  thou  wept'st,  and   looked'st,  and   spok'st 
when  first 

I  took  thee  up  : 

Curse  on  the  time  !     If  thy  commanding  tears 

Can  work  on  any  other,  use  thy  art ; 

I  '11  not  betray  it.     Which  way  wilt  thou  take  ? 

That  I  may  shun  thee,  for  thine  eyes  are  poison 

To  mine,  and  I  am  loath  to  grow  in  rage  : 

This  way,  or  that  way  ? 
Bel.  Any  will  serve  ;  but  I  will  choose  to  have 

That  path  in  chase  that  leads  unto  my  grave.        80 

{^Exeunt  severally. 


75 


ACT  IV.  sc.  2.  Philaster 


Enter  on  one  side  Dion^  and  on  the  other  the  two 
Woodmen. 

Dion.  This    is    the    strangest    sudden    chance !     You, 

woodman  1 
First  Wood.  My  Lord  Dion  ? 
Dion.  Saw  you  a  lady  come  this  way  on  a  sable  horse 

studded  with  stars  of  white  ? 
Second  Wood.  Was  she  not  young  and  tall  ? 
Dion.  Yes.     Rode  she  to  the  wood  or  to  the  plain  ? 
Second  Wood.  Faith  my  lord,  we  saw  none. 

{Exeunt  Woodmen. 
Dion.  Pox  of  your  questions  then  ! 

Enter  Cleremont. 

What,  is  she  found  ? 
Cle.  Nor  will  be,  I  think.  90 

Dion.  Let  him  seek  his  daughter  himself.     She  cannot 

stray  about  a  little  necessary  natural  business,  but 

the  whole  court  must  be  in  arms  :  when  she  has 

done,  we  shall  have  peace. 
C/^. There's  already  a  thousand  fatherless  tales  amongst 

us.     Some    say,    her    horse    ran    away   with  her ; 

some,  a  wolf  pursued  her  ;  others,  it  was  a  plot  to 

kill  her,  and  that  armed  men  were  seen  in  the  wood  ; 

but  questionless  she  rode  away  willingly.  99 

76 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  a. 


Enter  King^  Thraszline,  and  Attendants. 

King.  Where  is  she  ? 

Cle.  Sir,  I  cannot  tell. 

King.  How's  that? 

Answer  me  so  again  ! 
Cle.  Sir,  shall  I  lie? 

King.  Yes,  lie  and  damn,  rather  than  tell  me  that. 

I  say  again,  where  is  she  ?     Mutter  not  ! — 

Sir,  speak  you  ;  where  is  she  ? 
Dion.  Sir,  I  do  not  know. 

King.  Speak  that  again  so  boldly,  and,  by  Heaven, 

It  is  thy  last ! — You,  fellows,  answer  me  ; 

Where  is  she  ?     Mark  me,  all ;  I  am  your  King  : 

I  wish  to  see  my  daughter  ;  show  her  me  ; 

I  do  command  you  all,  as  you  are  subjects, 

To  show  her  me  !     What !  am  I  not  your  King  ? 

If  ay,  then  am  I  not  to  be  obeyed  ?  in 

Dion.  Yes,  if  you  command  things  possible  and  honest. 
King.  Things  possible  and  honest  !     Hear  me,  thou, 

Thou  traitor,  that  dar'st  confine  thy  King  to  things 

Possible  and  honest !  show  her  me, 

Or,  let  me  perish,  if  I  cover  not 

All  Sicily  with  blood  ! 
Dion.  Faith  I  cannot. 

Unless  you  tell  me  where  she  is. 
King.  You  have  betrayed  me  ;  you  have  let  me  lose 

n 


ACT  IV.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

The  jewel  of  my  life.     Go,  bring  her  to  me,  120 

And  set  her  here  before  me  :  'tis  the  King 
Will  have  it  so  ;  whose  breath  can  still  the  winds, 
Uncloud  the  sun,  charm  down  the  swelling  sea, 
And  stop  the  floods  of  heaven.     Speak,  can  it  not  ? 

Dion.  No. 

King.  No  !  cannot  the  breath  of  kings  do  this  ? 

Dion.  No  ;  nor  smell  sweet  itself,  if  once  the  lungs 
Be  but  corrupted. 

King.  Is  it  so?     Take  heed  ! 

Dioji.  Sir,  take  you  heed  how  you  dare  the  powers 
That  must  be  just. 

King.  Alas  !  what  are  we  kings  !     130 

Why  do  you  gods  place  us  above  the  rest, 
To  be  ser^^ed,  flattered,  and  adored,  till  we 
Believe  we  hold  within  our  hands  your  thunder, 
And  when  we  come  to  try  the  power  we  have. 
There's  not  a  leaf  shakes  at  our  threatenings  ? 
1    have   sinned,   'tis   true,   and    here   stand   to   be 

punished  ; 
Yet  would  not  thus  be  punished  ;  let  me  choose 
My  way,  and  lay  it  on  !  138 

Dion.  He  articles  with  the  gods.  Would  somebody 
would  draw  bonds  for  the  performance  of  covenants 
betwixt  them  !  \Aside. 

Enter  Pharamond^  Galatea^  and  Megra. 

King.  What,  is  she  found  ? 

78 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  a. 

Pha.  No  ;  we  have  ta'en  her  horse  ;  142 

He  galloped  empty  by.     There  is  some  treason. 

You,  Galatea,  rode  with  her  into  the  wood  ; 

Why  left  you  her  t 
Gal.  She  did  command  me. 

King.  Command  !  you  should  not. 
Gal.  'Twould  ill  become  my  fortunes  and  my  birth 

To  disobey  the  daughter  of  my  King. 
King.  You  're  all  cunning  to  obey  us  for  our  hurt ; 

But  I  will  have  her. 
Pha.  If  I  have  her  not,  150 

By  this  hand,  there  shall  be  no  more  Sicily. 
Dion.  What,  will  he  carry  it  to  Spain  in 's  pocket  ? 

{Aside. 
Pha.  I  will  not  leave  one  man  alive,  but  the  King, 

A  cook,  and  a  tailor. 
Dion.  Yet  you   may  do  well  to  spare  your  lady-bed- 
fellow ;  and  her  you  may  keep  for  a  spawner. 

\Aside. 
King.  I  see 

The  injuries  I  have  done  must  be  revenged.  \Aside. 
Dion.  Sir,  this  is  not  the  way  to  find  her  out. 
King.  Run  all,  disperse  yourselves.     The  man  that  finds 
her,  160 

Or  (if  she  be  killed),  the  traitor,   I'll  make  him 
great. 
Dion.  I  know  some  would  give  five  thousand  pounds  to 

find  her.  \Aside. 

79 


ACT  IV.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Pha.  Come,  let  us  seek. 

King.  Each  man  a  several  way  ; 

Here  I  myself. 
Dion.  Come,  gentlemen,  we  here. 

Cle.  Lady,  you  must  go  search  too. 
Meg.  I  had  rather  be  searched  myself. 

\Exeunt  severally. 


SCENE  III 

Afiother  part  of  the  Forest. 

Enter  Arethusa. 

Are.  Where  am  I  now  ?     Feet,  find  me  out  a  way. 
Without  the  counsel  of  my  troubled  head  : 
I  '11  follow  you  boldly  about  these  woods, 
O'er  mountains,  thorough  brambles,  pits,  and  floods. 
Heaven,  I  hope,  will  ease  me  :  I  am  sick. 

\Sits  down. 

Enter  Bellario. 

Bel.  Yonder 's  my  lady.     God  knows  I  want 
Nothing,  because  I  do  not  wish  to  live  ; 
Yet  I  will  try  her  charity.     [Aside.] — Oh  hear, 
You  that  have  plenty  !  from  that  flowing  store 
Drop  some  on  dry  ground. — See,  the  lively  red      lo 
80 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  3. 

Is  gone  to  guard  her  heart !     I  fear  she  faints. — 
Madam  ?  look  up  ! — She  breathes  not. — Open  once 

more 
Those  rosy  twins,  and  send  unto  my  lord 
Your  latest  farewell ! — Oh,  she  stirs. — How  is  it, 
Madam  ?  speak  comfort. 
Are.  'Tis  not  gently  done, 

To  put  me  in  a  miserable  life, 
And  hold  me  there  :  I  prithee,  let  me  go  ; 
I  shall  do  best  without  thee  ;  I  am  well. 

Enter  Philaster. 

Phi.  I  am  to  blame  to  be  so  much  in  rage  : 

I  '11  tell  her  coolly  when  and  where  I  heard  20 

This  killing  truth.     I  will  be  temperate 

In  speaking,  and  as  just  in  hearing. — 

Oh,  monstrous  !     Tempt  me  not,  ye  gods  !    good 

gods. 
Tempt  not  a  frail  man  !     What 's  he,  that  has  a 

heart, 
But  he  must  ease  it  here  ! 

Bel.  My  lord,  help,  help  ! 

The  princess  ! 

Are.  I  am  well :  forbear. 

Phi.  Let  me  love  lightning,  let  me  be  embraced 
And  kissed  by  scorpions,  or  adore  the  eyes 
Of  basilisks,  rather  than  trust  the  tongues  29 

F  81 


ACT  IV.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

Of  hell-bred  women  !     Some  good  god  look  down, 
And  shrink  these  veins  up  ;  stick  me  here  a  stone, 
Lasting  to  ages  in  the  memory 
Of  this  damned  act ! 

Hear  me,  you  wicked  ones  !     [AszWe. 
You  have  put  hills  of  fire  into  this  breast, 
Not  to  be  quenched  with  tears  j   for  which  may 

guilt 
Sit  on  your  bosoms  !  at  your  meals  and  beds 
Despair  await  you  !     What,  before  my  face  ? 
Poison  of  asps  between  your  lips  !  diseases 
Be  your  best  issues  !     Nature  make  a  curse, 
And  throw  it  on  you  ! 

Are.  Dear  Philaster,  leave         40 

To  be  enraged,  and  hear  me. 

P/ii.  I  have  done  ; 

Forgive  my  passion.     Not  the  calmed  sea, 
When  ^olus  locks  up  his  windy  brood. 
Is  less  disturbed  than  I  :  I  '11  make  you  know  it. 
Dear  Arethusa,  do  but  take  this  sword, 

[O^ers  his  drawn  sword. 
And  search  how  temperate  a  heart  I  have  ; 
Then  you  and  this  your  boy  may  live  and  reign 
In  lust  without  control.     Wilt  thou,  Bellario  ? 
I  prithee  kill  me  ;  thou  art  poor,  and  ma/st 
Nourish  ambitious  thoughts  ;  when  I  am  dead,      50 
Thy  way  were  freer.     Am  I  raging  now  ? 
If  I  were  mad,  I  should  desire  to  live. 
82 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  3. 

Sir,  feel  my  pulse,  whether  have  you  known 
A  man  in  a  more  equal  tune  to  die. 

Bel.  Alas,  my  lord,  your  pulse  keeps  madman's  time  ! 
So  does  your  tongue. 

PJii.  You  will  not  kill  me,  then  ? 

A7'e.  Kill  you ! 

Bel.  Not  for  the  world. 

Phi.  I  blame  not  thee, 

Bellario  :  thou  hast  done  but  that  which  gods 
Would  have  transformed  themselves  to  do.   Be  gone, 
Leave  me  without  reply  ;  this  is  the  last  60 

Of  all  our  meeting — {Exit  Bellario^     Kill  me  with 

this  sword  ; 
Be  wise,  or  worse  will  follow  :  we  are  two 
Earth  cannot  bear  at  once.     Resolve  to  do, 
Or  suffer. 

Are.  If  my  fortune  be  so  good  to  let  me  fall 

Upon  thy  hand,  I  shall  have  peace  in  death. 

Yet  tell  me  this,  there  will  be  no  slanders, 

No  jealousy  in  the  other  world  ;  no  ill  there? 

Phi.  No. 

Are.         Show  me,  then,  the  way. 

Phi.  Then  guide  my  feeble  hand, 

You  that  have  power  to  do  it,  for  I  must  70 

Perform  a  piece  of  justice  ! — If  your  youth 
Have  any  way  offended  Heaven,  let  prayers 
Short  and  effectual  reconcile  you  to  it. 

Are.  I  am  prepared. 


ACT  IV.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

Enter  a  Country  Fellow. 

C.  Fell.  I  '11  see  the  King,  if  he  be  in  the  forest ;  I  have 
hunted  him  these  two  hours  ;  if  I  should  come 
home  and  not  see  him,  my  sisters  would  laugh  at 
me.  I  can  see  nothing  but  people  better  horsed 
than  myself,  that  out-ride  me  ;  I  can  hear  nothing 
but  shouting.  These  kings  had  need  of  good 
brains  ;  this  whooping  is  able  to  put  a  mean  man 
out  of  his  wits.  There's  a  courtier  with  his  sword 
drawn  ;  by  this  hand,  upon  a  woman,  I  think  !      2)'^ 

Phi.  Are  you  at  peace  ? 

Are.  With  heaven  and  earth. 

Phi.  May  they  divide  thy  soul  and  body  !   {^Wounds her. 

C.  Fell.  Hold,  dastard  !  strike  a  woman  !  Thou  'rt  a 
craven,  I  warrant  thee  :  thou  wouldst  be  loth  to 
play  half  a  dozen  venies  at  wasters  with  a  good 
fellow  for  a  broken  head.  90 

Phi.  Leave  us,  good  friend. 

Are.  What  ill-bred  man  art  thou,  to  intrude  thyself 
Upon  our  private  sports,  our  recreations? 

C.  Fell.  God  'uds  me,  I  understand  you  not ;  but  I 
know  the  rogue  has  hurt  you. 

Phi.  Pursue  thy  ovm  affairs  :  it  will  be  ill 

To  multiply  blood  upon  my  head,  which  thou 
Wilt  force  me  to. 

C.  Fell.  I  know  not  your  rhetoric ;  but  I  can  lay  it  on, 
if  you  touch  the  woman.  100 

Phi.  Slave,  take  what  thou  deservest !  \They  fight. 

84 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  3. 

Are.  Heavens  guard  my  lord  ! 

C.  Fell.  Oh,  do  you  breathe  ? 

Phi.  I  hear  the  tread  of  people.     I  am  hurt : 

The  gods  take  part  against  me  :  could  this  boor 
Have  held  me  thus  else  ?     I  must  shift  for  life, 
Though  I  do  loathe  it.     I  would  find  a  course 
To  lose  it  rather  by  my  will  than  force. 

\_Aslde  a?td  exit. 

C.  Fell.  I  cannot  follow  the  rogue.      I  pray  thee,  wench, 
come  and  kiss  me  now. 


Enter  Pharamond,  Dion,  Cleremont,  Thrasiline, 
and  Woodmen. 

Pha.  What  art  thou?  110 

C.  Fell.  Almost  killed  I  am   for  a  foolish  woman  ;    a 

knave  has  hurt  her. 
Pha.  The  princess,  gentlemen! — Where's   the  wound, 

madam  ?     Is  it  dangerous  "i 
Are.  He  has  not  hurt  me. 
C.  Fell.  By  God,  she  lies ;  h'as  hurt  her  in  the  breast ; 

look  else. 
Pha.  O,  sacred  spring  of  innocent  blood  ! 
Dion.  'Tis  above  wonder  !  who  should  dare  this  ? 
Are.  I  felt  it  not.  120 

Pha.  Speak,  villain,  who  has  hurt  the  princess  ? 
C.  Fell.  Is  it  the  princess  ? 

85 


ACT  IV.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

Dion.  Ay. 

C.  Fell.  Then  I  have  seen  something  yet. 

Pha.  But  who  has  hurt  her  ? 

C.  Fell.  I  told  you,  a  rogue  ;  I  ne'er  saw  him  before,  I — 

Pha.  Madam,  who  did  it .? 

Are.  Some  dishonest  wretch  ; 

Alas,  I  know  him  not,  and  do  forgive  him  ! 
C.  Fell.  He's  hurt  too  ;  he  cannot  go  far;  I  made  my 

father's  old  fox  fly  about  his  ears.  130 

Pha.  How  will  you  have  me  kill  him  ? 
Are.  Not  at  all ; 

'Tis  some  distracted  fellow. 
Pha.  By  this  hand, 

I  '11  leave  ne'er  a  piece  of  him  bigger  than  a  nut, 

And  bring  him  all  to  you  in  my  hat. 
Are.  Nay,  good  sir, 

If  you  do  take  him,  bring  him  quick  to  me. 

And  I  will  study  for  a  punishment 

Great  as  his  fault. 
Pha.  I  will. 

Are.  But  swear. 

Pha.  By  all  my  love,  I  will. — 

Woodmen,  conduct  the  princess  to  the  King, 

And  bear  that  wounded  fellow  to  dressing. —        140 

Come,  gentlemen,  we  '11  follow  the  chase  close. 
\Exeunt  on  one  side  Pharamond,  Dion,  Cleremont^ 
and  Thrasiline ;  exit  o?t  the  other  Arethicsay 
attended  by  the  First  Woodman. 
86 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  4. 

C.  Fell.  I  pray  you,  friend,  let  me  see  the  King. 
Second  Wood.  That  you  shall,  and  receive  thanks. 
C.  Fell.  If  I  get  clear  of  this,  I  '11  go  to  see  no  more  gay 
sights.  {Exeunt. 


SCENE  IV 

Another  part  of  the  Forest. 

Enter  Bellario. 

Bel.  A  heaviness  near  death  sits  on  my  brow. 

And  I  must  sleep.     Bear  me,  thou  gentle  bank. 
For  ever,  if  thou  wilt.     You  sweet  ones  all, 

\Lies  down. 
Let  me  unworthy  press  you  ;  I  could  wish 
I  rather  were  a  corse  strewed  o'er  with  you 
Than  quick  above  you.     Dulness  shuts  mine  eyes, 
And  I  am  giddy  :  oh  that  I  could  take 
So  sound  a  sleep  that  I  might  never  wake  !    [Sleeps. 

Enter  Philaster. 

Phi.  I  have  done  ill ;  my  conscience  calls  me  false, 

To  strike  at  her  that  would  not  strike  at  me.  10 

When  I  did  fight,  methought  I  heard  her  pray 
The  gods  to  guard  me.     She  may  be  abused, 
And  I  a  loathed  villain  :  if  she  be. 
She  will  conceal  who  hurt  her.     He  has  wounds 
87 


ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

And  cannot  follov/ ;  neither  knows  he 

Who 's  this  ?     Bellario  sleeping  !     If  thou  be'st 
Guilty,  there  is  no  justice  that  thy  sleep 
Should  be  so  sound,  and  mine,  whom  thou  hast 
wronged,  [Cry  within. 

So  broken.     Hark!  I  am  pursued.     You  gods, 
I  '11  take  this  offered  means  of  my  escape  :  20 

They  have  no  mark  to  know  me  but  my  wounds, 
If  she  be  true  ;  if  false,  let  mischief  hght 
On  all  the  world  at  once  !     Sword,  print  my  wounds 
Upon  this  sleeping  boy  !     I  have  none,  I  think, 
Are  mortal,  nor  would  I  lay  greater  on  thee. 

[  Wounds  Bellario. 

Bel.  Oh,  death,  I  hope,  is  come  !     Blest  be  that  hand  ! 
It  meant  me  well.     Again,  for  pity's  sake  ! 

Phi.  I  have  caught  myself;  \Falls. 

The  loss  of  blood  hath  stayed   my  flight.     Here, 

here, 
Is  he  that  struck  thee  :  take  thy  full  revenge  ;        30 
Use  me,  as  I  did  mean  thee,  worse  than  death ; 
I  '11  teach  thee  to  revenge.     This  luckless  hand 
Wounded  the  princess  ;  tell  my  followers 
Thou  didst  receive  these  hurts  in  staying  me, 
And  I  will  second  thee  ;  get  a  reward. 

Bel.  Fly,  fly,  my  lord,  and  save  yourself ! 

Phi.  How's  this? 

Wouldst  thou  I  should  be  safe  ? 

Bel.  Else  were  it  vain 

88 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  4. 

For  me  to  live.     These  little  wounds  I  have 
Have  not  bled  much  :  reach  me  that  noble  hand  ; 
I  '11  help  to  cover  you. 

Phi.  Art  thou  true  to  me  ?     40 

Bel.  Or  let  me  perish  loathed  !     Come,  my  good  lord. 
Creep  in  amongst  those  bushes  :  who  does  know 
But   that   the    gods    may  save   your  much-loved 
breath  ? 

Phi.  Then  I  shall  die  for  grief,  if  not  for  this, 

That  I  have  wounded  thee.     What  wilt  thou  do? 

Bel.  Shift  for  myself  well.     Peace  !  I  hear  'em  come. 

\Philaster  creeps  into  a  bush. 
[Voices  wilhin.']  Follow,   follow,   follow!   that   way 
they  went. 

Bel.  With  my  own  wounds  I  '11  bloody  my  own  sword. 
I  need  not  counterfeit  to  fall ;  Heaven  knows       49 
That  I  can  stand  no  longer,  [Falls. 


and  Thrasiline. 

Pha.  To  this  place  we  have  tracked  him  by  his  blood. 

Cle.  Yonder,  my  lord,  creeps  one  away. 

Dion.  Stay,  sir  !  what  are  you  ? 

Bel.  A  wretched  creature,  wounded  in  these  woods 

By  beasts  :  relieve  me,  if  your  names  be  men, 

Or  I  shall  perish. 
Dion.  This  is  he,  my  lord, 

89 


ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

Upon  my  soul,  that  hurt  her  :  'tis  the  boy, 
That  wicked  boy,  that  served  her. 

Pha.  Oh,  thou  damned 

In  thy  creation  !  what  cause  couldst  thou  shape 
To  hurt  the  princess  ? 

Bel.  Then  I  'm  betrayed.  60 

Dion.  Betrayed  !  no,  apprehended. 

Bel.  I  confess 

(Urge  it  no  more)  that,  big  with  evil  thoughts, 
I  set  upon  her,  and  did  make  my  aim, 
Her  death.     For  charity  let  fall  at  once 
The  punishment  you  mean,  and  do  not  load 
This  weary  flesh  with  tortures. 

Pha.  I  will  know 

Who  hired  thee  to  this  deed. 

Bel.  Mine  own  revenge. 

Pha.  Revenge  !  for  what  ? 

Bel.  It  pleased  her  to  receive 

Me  as  her  page,  and,  when  my  forluies  ebbed. 
That  men  strid  o'er  them  careless,  she  did  shower 
Her  welcome  graces  on  me,  and  did  swell  71 

My  fortunes  till  they  overflowed  their  banks, 
Threatening  the  men  that  crossed  'em  ;  when,  as 

swift 
As  storms  arise  at  sea,  she  turned  her  eyes 
To  burning  suns  upon  me,  and  did  dry 
The  streams  she  had  bestowed,  leaving  me  worse 
And  more  contemned  than  other  little  brooks, 
90 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc  4. 

Because  I  had  been  great.     In  short,  I  knew 
I  could  not  live,  and  therefore  did  desire 
To  die  revenged. 

PJia.  If  tortures  can  be  found  80 

Long  as  thy  natural  life,  resolve  to  feel 
The  utmost  rigour. 

Cle.  Help  to  lead  him  hence. 

{^Philaster  creeps  out  of  the  dusk. 

Phi.  Turn  back,  you  ravishers  of  innocence  ! 
Know  ye  the  price  of  that  you  bear  away 
So  rudely  ? 

Pha.  Who's  that? 

Dion.  'Tis  the  Lord  Philaster. 

Phi.  'Tis  not  the  treasure  of  all  kings  in  one, 
The  wealth  of  Tagus,  nor  the  rocks  of  pearl 
That  pave  the  court  of  Neptune,  can  weigh  down 
That  virtue.     It  was  I  that  hurt  the  princess. 
Place  me,  some  god,  upon  a  pyramis  9a 

Higher  than  hills  of  earth,  and  lend  a  voice 
Loud  as  your  thunder  to  me,  that  from  thence 
I  may  discourse  to  all  the  under-world 
The  worth  that  dwells  in  him  ! 

Pha.  How's  this? 

Bel.  My  lord,  some  man 

Weary  of  life,  that  would  be  glad  to  die. 

Phi.  Leave  these  untimely  courtesies,  Bellario. 

Bel.  Alas,  he  's  mad  !     Come,  will  you  lead  me  on  ? 

Phi.  By  all  the  oaths  that  men  ought  most  to  keep, 
91 


ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

And  gods  do  punish  most  when  men  do  break, 
He  touched  her  not. — Take  heed,  Bellario,  100 

How  thou  dost  drown  the  virtues  thou  hast  shown 
With  perjury. — By  all  the  gods,  'twas  I  ! 
You  know  she  stood  betwixt  me  and  my  right. 

Pha.  Thy  own  tongue  be  thy  judge  ! 

Cle.  It  was  Philaster. 

Dion.  Is 't  not  a  brave  boy  ? 

Well,  sirs,  I  fear  me  we  were  all  deceived. 

Phi.  Have  I  no  friend  here  ? 

Dion.  Yes. 

Phi.  Then  show  it :  some 

Good  body  lend  a  hand  to  draw  us  nearer. 
Would  you  have  tears  shed  for  you  when  you  die  ? 
Then  lay  me  gently  on  his  neck,  that  there  1 10 

I  may  weep  floods  and  breathe  forth  my  spirit. 
'Tis  not  the  wealth  of  Plutus,  nor  the  gold 

[Embraces  Bellario. 
Locked  in  the  heart  of  earth,  can  buy  away 
This  arm-full  from  me  :  this  had  been  a  ransom 
To  have  redeemed  the  great  Augustus  Caesar, 
Had  he  been  taken.    You  hard-hearted  men, 
More  stony  than  these  mountains,  can  you  see 
Such  clear  pure  blood  drop,  and  not  cut  your  flesh 
To  stop  his  life  ;  to  bind  whose  bitter  wounds,     119 
Queens  ought  to  tear  their  hair,  and  with  their  tears 
Bathe  'em. — Forgive  me,  thou  that  art  the  wealth 
Of  poor  Philaster  ! 

92 


Philaster  act  iv.  sc.  4. 


Enter  King^  Arethusa^  and  Guard. 

King.  Is  the  villain  ta'en? 

Pha.  Sir,  here  be  two  confess  the  deed  ;  but  say 

It  was  Philaster. 
Phi.  Question  it  no  more  ; 

It  was. 
King.  The  fellow  that  did  fight  with  him, 

Will  tell  us  that. 
Are.  Ay  me  !  I  know  he  will. 

King.  Did  not  you  know  him  1 
Are.  Sir,  if  it  was  he, 

He  was  disguised. 
Phi.  I  was  so.     Oh^  my  stars, 

That  I  should  live  still.  [Aside. 

King.  Thou  ambitious  fool. 

Thou  that  hast  laid  a  train  for  thy  own  life  I —     130 

Now  I  do  mean  to  do,  I  '11  leave  to  talk. 

Bear  them  to  prison. 
Are.  Sir,  they  did  plot  together  to  take  hence 

This  harmless  life  ;  should  it  pass  unrevenged, 

I  should  to  earth  go  weeping  :  grant  me,  then, 

By  all  the  love  a  father  bears  his  child, 

Their  custodies,  and  that  I  may  appoint 

Their  tortures  and  their  deaths. 
Dion.  Death  !     Soft ;  our  law  will  not  reach  that  for 
this  fault. 

93 


ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

King.  'Tis  granted  ;  take  'em  to  you  with  a  guard. — 140 
Come,  princely  Pharamond,  this  business  past, 
We  may  uith  more  security  go  on 
To  your  intended  match, 

\Exeunt  all  except  Dion,  Cleremoni,  and  Thrasiline. 
Cle.  I  pray  that  this  action  lose  not  Philaster  the  hearts 

of  the  people. 
Dion,  Fear  it  not ;  their  over- wise  heads  will  think  it 
but  a  trick.  {Exeunt. 


94 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  a. 


ACT   THE   FIFTH 
SCENE  I 

Before  the  Palace. 

E7iter  Dion^  Cleremont^  and  Thrasiline, 

Thra.  Has  the  King  sent  for  him  to  death  ? 

Dion.  Yes  ;    but  the  King  must  know  'tis  not  in   his 

power  to  war  with  Heaven. 
Cle.  We  Hnger  time  ;   the  King  sent  for  Philaster  and 

the  headsman  an  hour  ago. 
Thra.  Are  all  his  wounds  well  ? 
Dion.  All ;    they  were  but  scratches ;    but  the  loss  of 

blood  made  him  faint. 
Cle.  We  dally,  gentlemen. 

Thra.  h.\\2i^  !  lo 

Dio7t.  We  '11  scuffle  hard  before  he  perish.  \Exeunt. 

SCENE  H 

A  Prison. 

E?tter  Philaster^  Arethusa,  and  Bellario. 

Are.  Nay,  faith,  Philaster,  grieve  not ;  we  are  well. 
Bel.  Nay,  good  my  lord,  forbear ;  we  are  wondrous  well. 
95 


ACT  V.  sc.  2.  Philaster 

Phi.  Oh,  Arethusa,  oh,  Bellario, 
Leave  to  be  kind  ! 

I  shall  be  shot  from  Heaven,  as  now  from  earth, 
If  you  continue  so.     I  am  a  man 
False  to  a  pair  of  the  most  trusty  ones 
That  ever  earth  bore  :  can  it  bear  us  all  ? 
Forgive,  and  leave  me.     But  the  King  hath  sent 
To  call  me  to  my  death  :  oh,  show  it  me,  lo 

And  then  forget  me  !  and  for  thee,  my  boy, 
I  shall  deliver  words  will  mollify 
The  hearts  of  beasts  to  spare  thy  innocence. 

Bel.  Alas,  my  lord,  my  life  is  not  a  thing 

Worthy  your  noble  thoughts  !  'tis  not  a  life, 

'Tis  but  a  piece  of  childhood  throAvn  away. 

Should  I  outlive  you,  I  should  then  outlive 

Virtue  and  honour ;  and  when  that  day  comes. 

If  ever  I  shall  close  these  eyes  but  once, 

May  I  live  spotted  for  my  perjury,  20 

And  waste  by  limbs  to  nothing  ! 

Are.  And  I  (the  woful'st  maid  that  ever  was, 

Forced  with  my  hands  to  bring  my  lord  to  death) 
Do  by  the  honour  of  a  virgin  swear 
To  tell  no  hours  beyond  it ! 

Phi.  Make  me  not  hated  so. 

Are.  Come  from  this  prison  all  joyful  to  our  deaths  ! 

Phi.  People  will  tear  me,  when  they  find  you  true 
To  such  a  wretch  as  I  ;  I  shall  die  loathed. 
Enjoy  your  kingdoms  peaceably,  whilst  I 
96 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  a. 

For  ever  sleep  forgotten  with  my  faults  :  30 

Every  just  servant,  every  maid  in  love, 

Will  have  a  piece  of  me,  if  you  be  true. 
Are.  My  dear  lord,  say  not  so. 
Bel.  A  piece  of  you! 

He  was  not  born  of  woman  that  can  cut 

It  and  look  on. 
Phi.  Take  me  in  tears  betwixt  you,  for  my  heart 

Will  break  with  shame  and  sorrow. 
Are,  Why,  'tis  well. 

Bel.  Lament  no  more. 
Phi.  Why,  what  would  you  have  done 

If  you  had  wronged  me  basely,  and  had  found       39 

Your  life  no  price  compared  to  mine  1   for  love,  sirs, 

Deal  with  me  truly. 
Bel,  Twas  mistaken,  sir. 

Phi.  Why,  if  it  were  ? 
Bel,  Then,  sir,  we  would  have  asked 

Your  pardon. 
Phi.  And  have  hope  to  enjoy  it  ? 

Are.  Enjoy  it !  ay. 

Phi.  Would  you  indeed  ?  be  plain. 

Bel.  We  would,  my  lord. 
Phi.  Forgive  me,  then. 

Are.  So,  so. 

Bel.  'Tis  as  it  should  be  now. 
Phi.  Lead  to  my  death.        [Exeunf, 


97 


ACT  V.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

SCENE  III 
A  State-room  in  the  Palace. 

Ejtter  King^  Dion^  Cleremont^  Thrasili7ie^  and 
Attendants. 

King.  Gentlemen,  who  saw  the  prince  ? 

Cle.  So  please  you,  sir,  he 's  gone  to  see  the  city 
And  the  new  platform,  with  some  gentlemen 
Attending  on  him. 

King.  Is  the  princess  ready 

To  bring  her  prisoner  out  ? 

Thra.  She  waits  your  grace. 

King.  Tell  her  we  stay.  \^Exit  Thrasiline. 

Dion.  King,  you  may  be  deceived  yet : 

The  head  you  aim  at  cost  more  setting  on 
Than  to  be  lost  so  lightly.     If  it  must  off. 
Like  a  wild  overflow,  that  swoops  before  him 
A  golden  stack,  and  with  it  shakes  down  bridges,  10 
Cracks  the  strong  hearts  of  pines,  whose  cable-roots 
Held  out  a  thousand  storms,  a  thousand  thunders, 
And,  so  made  mightier,  takes  whole  villages 
Upon  his  back,  and  in  that  heat  of  pride 
Charges  strong  towns,  towers,  castles,  palaces, 
And  lays  them  desolate  ;  so  shall  thy  head, 
Thy  noble  head,  bury  the  lives  of  thousands, 
That  must  bleed  with  thee  like  a  sacrifice, 
In  thy  red  ruins.  {Aside. 

98 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  3. 


Enter  Arethusa,  Philaster,  Bellario  in  a  robe  ajid 
garland,  and  Thrasiline. 

King.  How  now  ?  what  masque  is  this  ? 

Bel.  Right  royal  sir,  I  should  20 

Sing  you  an  epithalamium  of  these  lovers, 
But  having  lost  my  best  airs  with  my  fortunes, 
And  wanting  a  celestial  harp  to  strike 
This  blessed  union  on,  thus  in  glad  story 
I  give  you  all.     These  two  fair  cedar-branches 
The  noblest  of  the  mountain  where  they  grew, 
Straightest  and  tallest,  under  whose  still  shades 
The  worthier  beasts  have  made  their  lairs,  and  slept 
Free  from  the  fervour  of  the  Sirian  star 
And  the  fell  thunder-stroke,  free  from  the  clouds,  30 
When  they  were  big  with  humour,  and  delivered. 
In  thousand  spouts  their  issues  to  the  earth  ; 
Oh,  there  was  none  but  silent  there  ! 
Till  never-pleased  Fortune  shot  up  shrubs, 
Base  under-brambles,  to  divorce  these  branches  ; 
And  for  a  while  they  did  so,  and  did  reign 
Over  the  mountain,  and  choke  up  his  beauty 
With  brakes,  rude  thorns  and  thistles,  till  the  sun 
Scorched  them  even  to  the  roots  and  dried  them 

there : 
And  now  a  gentle  gale  hath  blown  again,  40 

That  made  these  branches  meet  and  twine  together, 
99 


ACT  V.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

Never  to  be  divided.     The  god  that  sings 

His  holy  numbers  over  marriage-beds 

Hath  knit  their  noble  hearts  ;  and  here  they  stand 

Your  children,  mighty  King  :  and  I  have  done. 

King.  How,  how  ? 

Are.  Sir,  if  you  love  it  in  plain  truth 

(For  now  there  is  no  masquing  in 't),  this  gentleman, 
The  prisoner  that  you  gave  me,  is  become 
My  keeper,  and  through  all  the  bitter  throes 
Your  jealousies  and  his  ill  fate  have  wrought  him, 
Thus  nobly  hath  he  struggled,  and  at  length  51 

Arrived  here  my  dear  husband. 

King.  Your  dear  husband  ! — 

Call  in  the  Captain  of  the  Citadel. — 
There  you  shall  keep  your  wedding.     I  '11  provide 
A  masque  shall  make  your  Hymen  turn  his  saffron 
Into  a  sullen  coat,  and  sing  sad  requiems 
To  your  departing  souls  ; 

Blood  shall  put  out  your  torches  ;  and,  instead 
Of  gaudy  flowers  about  your  wanton  necks, 
An  axe  shall  hang  like  a  prodigious  meteor,  60 

Ready  to  crop  your  loves'  sweets.     Hear,  you  gods  ! 
From  this  time  do  I  shake  all  title  off 
Of  father  to  this  woman,  this  base  woman  ; 
And  what  there  is  of  vengeance  in  a  lion 
Chafed  among  dogs  or  robbed  of  his  dear  young, 
The  same,  enforced  more  terrible,  more  mighty, 
Expect  from  me  I 

100 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  3. 

Are,  Sir,  by  that  little  life  I  have  left  to  swear  by, 
There 's  nothing  that  can  stir  me  from  myself. 
What  I  have  done,  I  have  done  without  repentance, 
For  death  can  be  no  bugbear  unto  me,  71 

So  long  as  Pharamond  is  not  my  headsman. 

Dion.  Sweet  peace  upon  thy  soul,  thou  worthy  maid, 
Whene'er  thou  diest !     For  this   time    I  '11   excuse 

thee, 
Or  be  thy  prologue.  \Aside. 

Phi.  Sir,  let  me  speak  next ; 

And  let  my  dying  words  be  better  with  you 
Than  my  dull  living  actions.     If  you  aim 
At  the  dear  life  of  this  sweet  innocent, 
You  are  a  tyrant  and  a  savage  monster. 
That  feeds  upon  the  blood  you  gave  a  life  to ;        80 
Your  memory  shall  be  as  foul  behind  you, 
As  you  are  living  ;  all  your  better  deeds 
Shall  be  in  water  writ,  but  this  in  marble ; 
No  chronicle  shall  speak  you,  though  your  own, 
But  for  the  shame  of  men.     No  monument, 
Though  high  and  big  as  Pelion,  shall  be  able 
To  cover  this  base  murder  :  make  it  rich 
With  brass,  with  purest  gold  and  shining  jasper. 
Like  the  Pyramids  ;  lay  on  epitaphs 
Such  as  make  great  men  gods  ;  my  little  marble,  90 
That  only  clothes  my  ashes,  not  my  faults. 
Shall  far  outshine  it.     And  for  after-issues. 
Think  not  so  madly  of  the  heavenly  wisdoms, 
loi 


ACT  V.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

That  they  will  give  you  more  for  your  mad  rage 

To  cut  off,  unless  it  be  some  snake,  or  something 

Like  yourself,  that  in  his  birth  shall  strangle  you. 

Remember  my  father,  King  !  there  was  a  fault, 

But  I  forgive  it :  let  that  sin  persuade  you 

To  love  this  lady  ;  if  you  have  a  soul. 

Think,  save  her,  and  be  saved.    For  myself,         roo 

I  have  so  long  expected  this  glad  hour, 

So  languished  under  you,  and  daily  withered. 

That,  by  the  gods,  it  is  a  joy  to  die  ; 

I  find  a  recreation  in  't. 

Enter  a  Gentleman. 

Ge7it.  Where  is  the  King  ? 

King.  Here. 

Gent.  Get  you  to  your  strength. 

And  rescue  the  Prince  Pharamond  from  danger  ; 
He 's  taken  prisoner  by  the  citizens. 
Fearing  the  Lord  Philaster. 

Dion.  Oh,  brave  followers  ! 

Mutiny,  my  fine  dear  countrymen,  mutiny  !  109 

Now,  my  brave  valiant  foremen,  shew  your  weapons 
In  honour  of  your  mistresses  !  \Aside' 

Enter  a  Second  Gentleman. 

Second  Gent.  Arm,  arm,  arm  I 

King.  A  thousand  devils  take  'em  ! 
102 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  3. 

Dion.  A  thousand  blessings  on  'em  !  \Aside. 

Second  Gent.  Arm,  O  King  !     The  city  is  in  mutiny, 
Led  by  an  old  grey  ruffian,  who  comes  on 
In  rescue  of  the  Lord  Philaster. 

King.  Away  to  the  citadel !     I  '11  see  them  safe, 

And  then    cope  with    these    burghers.       Let    the 

guard 
And  all  the  gentlemen  give  strong  attendance. 

{Exeunt  all  except  Dioft^  Cleremont, 
and  Thrasiline, 

Cle.  The  city  up  !  this  was  above  our  wishes.  120 

Dion.  Ay,  and  the  marriage  too.     By  my  life. 
This  noble  lady  has  deceived  us  all. 
A  plague  upon  myself,  a  thousand  plagues. 
For  having  such  unworthy  thoughts  of  her  dear 

honour ! 
Oh,  I  could  beat  myself !  or  do  you  beat  me. 
And  I  '11  beat  you  ;  for  we  had  all  one  thought. 

Cle.  No,  no,  'twill  but  lose  time. 

Dion.  You  say  true.  Are  your  swords  sharp? — Well, 
my  dear  countrymen  What-ye-lacks,  if  you  continue, 
and  fall  not  back  upon  the  first  broken  shin,  I  '11 
have  you  chronicled  and  chronicled,  and  cut  and 
chronicled,  and  all-to-be-praised  and  sung  in  sonnets, 
and  bawled  in  new  brave  ballads,  that  all  tongues 
shall  troul  you  in  scEcula  scBculoruin^  my  kind  can- 
carriers.  135 

Thra.  What,  if  a  toy  take  'em  i'  the  heels  now,  and 
103 


ACT  V.  SC.  3. 


Philaster 


they  run  all  away,  and  cry,  '  The  devil  take  the  hind- 
most '  ? 
Dion.  Then  the  same  devil  take  the  foremost  too,  and 
souse  him  for  his  breakfast !  If  they  all  prove 
cowards,  my  curses  fly  amongst  them,  and  be 
speeding  !  May  they  have  murrains  reign  to  keep 
the  gentlemen  at  home  unbound  in  easy  frieze  ! 
may  the  moths  branch  their  velvets,  and  their  silks 
only  to  be  worn  before  sore  eyes  !  may  their  false 
lights  undo  'em,  and  discover  presses,  holes,  stains, 
and  oldness  in  their  stuffs,  and  make  them  shop-rid  ! 
may  they  keep  whores  and  horses,  and  break  ;  and 
live  mewed  up  with  necks  of  beef  and  turnips  !  may 
they  have  many  children,  and  none  like  the  father  ! 
may  they  know  no  language  but  that  gibberish  they 
prattle  to  their  parcels,  unless  it  be  the  goatish 
Latin  they  write  in  their  bonds— and  may  they  write 
that  false,  and  lose  their  debts  1  154 

Re-enter  King. 

King.  Now  the  vengeance  of  all  the  gods  confound 
them  !  How  they  swarm  together  !  what  a  hum 
they  raise  ! — Devils  choke  your  wild  throats  !  If 
a  man  had  need  to  use  their  valours,  he  must  pay  a 
brokage  for  it,  and  then  bring  'em  on,  and  they  will 
fight  like  sheep.  'Tis  Philaster,  none  but  Philaster, 
must  allay  this  heat :  they  will  not  hear  me  speak, 
but  fling  dirt  at  me  and  call  me  tyrant.  Oh,  run, 
104 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  3. 

dear  friend,  and  bring  the  Lord  Philaster !  speak 
him  fair ;  call  him  prince  ;  do  him  all  the  courtesy 
you  can ;  commend  me  to  him.  Oh,  my  wits,  my 
wits  !  [ExU  Clereino'tit. 

Dion.  Oh,  my  brave  countrymen  !  as  I  live,  I  will  not 
buy  a  pin  out  of  your  walls  for  this  ;  nay,  you  shall 
cozen  me,  and  I  '11  thank  you,  and  send  you  brawn 
and  bacon,  and  soil  you  every  long  vacation  a  brace 
of  foremen,  that  at  Michaelmas  shall  come  up  fat 
and  kicking.  \_Aside. 

King.  What  they  will  do  with  this  poor  prince,  the  gods 
know,  and  I  fear.  174 

Dion.  Why,  sir,  they'll  flay  him,  and  make  church- 
buckets  of 's  skin,  to  quench  rebellion ;  then  clap  a 
rivet  in 's  sconce,  and  hang  him  up  for  a  sign. 

Enter  Philaster  and  Cleremont. 

King.  Oh,  worthy  sir,  forgive  me  !  do  not  make 
Your  miseries  and  my  faults  meet  together, 
To  bring  a  greater  danger.     Be  yourself,  180 

Still  sound  amongst  diseases.     I  have  wronged  you  ; 
And  though  I  find  it  last,  and  beaten  to  it. 
Let  first  your  goodness  know  it.     Calm  the  people. 
And  be  what  you  were  bom  to  :  take  your  love, 
And  with  her  my  repentance,  all  my  wishes 
And  all  my  prayers.     By  the  gods,  my  heart  speaks 
this ; 

105 


ACT  V.  sc.  3.  Philaster 

And  if  the  least  fall  from  me  not  performed, 
May  I  be  struck  with  thunder  ! 

Phi.  Mighty  sir, 

I  will  not  do  your  greatness  so  much  wrong, 
As  not  to  make  your  word  truth.     Free  the  princess 
And  the  poor  boy,  and  let  me  stand  the  shock      190 
Of  this  mad  sea-breach,  which  I  '11  either  turn, 
Or  perish  with  it. 

King.  Let  your  own  word  free  them. 

Phi.  Then  thus  I  take  my  leave,  kissing  your  hand. 
And  hanging  on  your  royal  word.     Be  kingly, 
And  be  not  moved,  sir  :  I  shall  bring  you  peace. 
Or  never  bring  myself  back. 

Ki7ig.  All  the  gods  go  with  thee.     \Exeunt 


SCENE  IV 

A  Street. 

Enter  an  old  Captain  and  Citizens  with  Pharainond 
prisoner. 

Cap.  Come,  my  brave  myrmidons,  let  us  fall  on. 

Let  our  caps  swarm,  my  boys,  and   your  nimble 

tongues 
Forget  your  mother-gibberish  of '  what  do  you  lack,' 
And  set  your  mouths  ope,  children,  till  your  palates 
Fall  frighted  half  a  fathom  past  the  cure 
Of  bay-salt  and  gross  pepper,  and  then  cry 
ic6 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  4. 

'  Philaster,  brave  Philaster  ! '    Let  Philaster 
Be  deeper  in  request,  my  ding-a-dings. 
My  pairs  of  dear  indentures,  kings  of  clubs. 
Than  your  cold  water-camlets,  or  your  paintings 
Spitted  with  copper.    Let  not  your  hasty  silks,      10 
Or  your  branched  cloth  of  bodkin,  or  your  tissues, 
Dearly  beloved  of  spiced  cake  and  custard. 
Your  Robin  Hoods,  Scarlets,  and  Johns,  tie  your 

affections 
In  darkness  to  your  shops.     No,  dainty  duckers. 
Up    with    your  three-piled    spirits,   your    wrought 

valours  ; 
And  let  your  uncut  cholers  make  the  King  feel 
The  measure  of  your  mightiness.     Philaster  ! 
Cry,  my  rose-nobles,  cry  ! 

All.  Philaster!  Philaster! 

Ca^.  How  do  you  like  this,  my  lord-prince  ?  20 

These  are  mad  boys,  I  tell  you  ;  these  are  things 
That  will  not  strike  their  top-sails  to  a  foist, 
And  let  a  man-of-war,  an  argosy, 
Hull  and  cry  cockles. 

F^a.  Why,  you  rude  slave,  do  you  know  what  you  do  ? 

Cap.  My  pretty  prince  of  puppets,  we  do  know  ; 
And  give  your  greatness  warning  that  you  talk 
No  more  such  bug's-words,  or  that  soldered  crown 
Shall   be   scratched  with  a  musket.     Dear  prince 

Pippin, 
Down  with  your  noble  blood,  or,  as  I  live,  30 

107 


ACT  V.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

I  '11  have  you  coddled. — Let  him  loose,  my  spirits: 
Make  us  a  round  ring  with  your  bills,  my  Hectors, 
And  let  me  see  what  this  trim  man  dares  do. 
Now,  sir,  have  at  you  !  here  I  lie  ; 
And  with  this  swashing  blow  (do  you  see,  sweet 

prince  ?) 
I  could  hulk  your  grace,  and  hang  you  up  cross- 
legged, 
Like  a  hare  at  a  poulter's,  and  do  this  with  this 
wiper. 
PJia.  You  will  not  see  me  murdered,  wicked  villains  ? 
First  at.  Yes,  indeed,  will  we,  sir  ;  we  have  not  seen  one 

For  a  great  while. 
Cap.  He  would  have  weapons,  would  he  ? 

Give  him  a  broadside,  my  brave  boys,  with  your 
pikes ;  41 

Branch  me  his  skin  in  flowers  like  a  satin, 
And  between  every  flower  a  mortal  cut. — 
Your  royalty  shall  ravel ! — Jag  him,  gentlemen  ; 
I  '11  have  him  cut  to  the  kell,  then  doAvn  the  seams. 
Oh  for  a  whip  to  make  him  galloon-laces  ! 
I  '11  have  a  coach-whip. 
Pha.  Oh,  spare  me,  gentlemen  ! 

Cap.  Hold,  hold; 

The  man  begins  to  fear  and  know  himself ; 
He  shall  for  this  time  only  be  seeled  up,  50 

With  a  feather  through  his  nose,  that  he  may  only 
See  heaven,  and  think  whither  he  is  going.     Nay, 
108 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  4. 

Nay,  my  beyond-sea  sir,  we  will  proclaim  you  : 

You  would  be  king  I 

Thou  tender  heir- apparent  to  a  church-ale, 

Thou  slight  prince  of  single  sarcenet, 

Thou  royal  ring-tail,  fit  to  fly  at  nothing 

But  poor  men's  poultry,  and  have  every  boy 

Beat  thee  from  that  too  with  his  bread  and  butter  ! 
Pha.  Gods  keep  me  from  these  hell-hounds  !  60 

First  at.  Shall 's  geld  him,  captain  ? 
Cap.  No,  you  shall  spare  his  dowcets,  my  dear  donsels ; 

As  you  respect  the  ladies,  let  them  flourish  : 

The  curses  of  a  longing  woman  kill 

As  speedy  as  a  plague,  boys. 
First  Cit.  I  '-11  have  a  leg,  that 's  certain. 
Second  Cit.  I  '11  have  an  arm. 
Third  Cit.  I'll  have  his  nose,  and  at  mine  own  charge 

build  a  college  and  clap  it  upon  the  gate. 
Fourth  Cit.  I  '11  have  his  little  gut  to  string  a  kit  with  : 

For  certainly  a  royal  gut  will  sound  like  silver.      71 
Pha.  Would  they  were  in  thy  belly,  and  I  past 

My  pain  once  ! 
Fifth  Cit.  Good  captain,  let  me  have  his  liver  to  feed 

ferrets. 
Cap.  Who  will  have  parcels  else  ?  speak. 
Pha.  Good  gods,  consider  me  !  I  shall  be  tortured. 
First  Cit.  Captain,  I  '11  give  you  the  trimming  of  your 
two-hand  sword,  79 

And  let  m.e  have  his  skin  to  make  false  scabbards. 
109 


ACT  V.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

Second  Cit.  He  had  no  horns,  sir,  had  he? 
Cap.  No,  sir,  he's  a  pollard: 

What  wouldst  thou  do  with  horns  ? 
Second  Cit.  Oh,  if  he  had  had, 

I  would  have  made  rare  hafts  and  whistles  of  'em  ; 

But  his  shin-bones,  if  they  be  sound,  shall  serve  me. 

Enter  Philaster. 

All.  Long  live  Philaster,  the  brave  Prince  Philaster  ! 

Phi.  I  thank  you,  gentlemen.     But  why  are  these 

Rude  weapons  brought  abroad,  to  teach  your  hands 
Uncivil  trades? 

Cap.  My  royal  Rosicleer, 

We  are  thy  myrmidons,  thy  guard,  thy  roarers  ;     90 
And  when  thy  noble  body  is  in  durance, 
Thus  do  we  clap  our  musty  m.urrions  on. 
And  trace  the  streets  in  terror.     Is  it  peace, 
Thou  Mars  of  men  ?  is  the  King  sociable, 
And  bids  thee  live  ?  art  thou  above  thy  foemen. 
And  free  as  Phoebus  ?  speak.     If  not,  this  stand 
Of  royal  blood  shall  be  abroach,  a-tilt, 
And  run  even  to  the  lees  of  honour. 

Phi.  Hold,  and  be  satisfied  :  I  am  myself;  100 

Free  as  my  thoughts  are  :  by  the  gods,  I  am  ! 

Cap.  Art  thou  the  dainty  darling  of  the  King  ? 
Art  thou  the  Hylas  to  our  Hercules  ? 
Do  the  lords  bow,  and  the  regarded  scarlets 


Philaster  a.ct  v.  sc.  4. 

Kiss  their  gummed  golls,  and  cry  *  We  are  your  ser- 
vants '  ? 
Is  the  court  navigable,  and  the  presence  stuck 
With  flags  of  friendship  ?     If  not,  we  are  thy  castle, 
And  this  man  sleeps. 

Phi.  I  am  what  I  desire  to  be,  your  friend ; 

I  am  what  I  was  born  to  be,  your  prince.  no 

Pha,  Sir,  there  is  some  humanity  in  you  ; 
You  have  a  noble  soul :  forget  my  name, 
And  know  my  misery  :  set  me  safe  aboard 
From  these  wild  cannibals,  and,  as  I  live, 
I  '11  quit  this  land  for  ever.     There  is  nothing, — 
Perpetual  prisonment,  cold,  hunger,  sickness 
Of  all  sorts,  of  all  dangers,  and  all  together, 
The  worst  company  of  the  worst  men,  madness,  age, 
To  be  as  many  creatures  as  a  woman, 
And  do  as  all  they  do,  nay,  to  despair, —  120 

But  I  would  rather  make  it  a  new  nature, 
And  live  with  all  those,  than  endure  one  hour 
Amongst  these  wild  dogs. 

Phi.  I  do  pity  you. — Friends,  discharge  your  fears  ; 
Deliver  me  the  prince  :  I  '11  warrant  you 
I  shall  be  old  enough  to  find  my  safety. 

Third  Cit.  Good  sir,  take  heed  he  does  not  hurt  you  • 
He  is  a  fierce  man,  I  can  tell  you,  sir. 

Cap.  Prince,  by  your  leave,  I  '11  have  a  surcingle, 

And  make  you  like  a  hawk.  130 

Phi.  Away,  away,  there  is  no  danger  in  him  : 
III 


ACT  V.  sc.  4.  Philaster 

Alas,  he  had  rather  sleep  to  shake  his  fit  off ! 

Look  you,  friends,  how  gently  he  leads  !     Upon  my 

word, 
He 's  tame  enough,  he  needs  no  further  watching. 
Good  my  friends,  go  to  your  houses. 
And  by  me  have  your  pardons  and  my  love ; 
And  know  there  shall  be  nothing  in  my  power 
You  may  deserve,  but  you  shal  have  your  wishes  : 
To  give  you  more  thanks,  were  to  flatter  you. 
Continue  still  your  love  ;  and,  for  an  earnest,       140 
Drink  this.  [Gives  money. 

All.  Long  may'st  thou  live,  brave  prince,  brave  prince, 
brave  prince  !      \Exeunt  Philaster  and  Pharaviond. 

Cap.  Go  thy  ways,  thou  art  the  king  of  courtesy  1 
Fall  off  again,  my  sweet  youths.     Come, 
And  every  man  trace  to  his  house  again, 
And  hang  his  pewter  up  ;  then  to  the  tavern, 
And  bring  your  wives  in  muffs.    We  will  have  music ; 
And  the  red  grape  shall  make  us  dance  and  rise, 
boys.  \Exeunt. 

SCENE  V 

An  Apart7nent  in  the  Palace. 

Enter  King,  Arethusa,  Galatea,  Megra,  Dion,  Clers- 
mont,  Tkrasiline,  Bellario,  and  Attendants. 

Ki?ig.  Is  it  appeased? 
Dion.  Sir,  all  is  quiet  as  this  dead  of  night, 
112 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  s 

As  peaceable  as  sleep.     My  lord  Philaster 
Brings  on  the  prince  himself. 
King.  Kind  gentleman  ! 

I  will  not  break  the  least  word  I  have  given 
In  promise  to  him  :  I  have  heaped  a  world 
Of  grief  upon  his  head,  which  yet  I  hope 
To  wash  away. 

Enter  Philaster  and  Pharamond. 

Cle.  My  lord  is  come. 

King.  My  son  I 

Blest  be  the  time  that  I  have  leave  to  call 
Such  virtue  mine  !     Now  thou  art  in  mine  arms,  lo 
Methinks  I  have  a  salve  unto  my  breast 
For  all  the  stings  that  dwell  there.     Streams  of  grief 
That  I  have  wrought  thee,  and  as  much  of  joy 
That  I  repent  it,  issue  from  mine  eyes  : 
Let  them  appease  thee.     Take  thy  right ;  take  her ; 
She  is  thy  right  too  ;  and  forget  to  urge 
My  vex^d  soul  with  that  I  did  before. 

Phi.  Sir,  it  is  blotted  from  my  memory, 

Past  and  forgotten. — For  you,  prince  of  Spain, 

Whom  I  have  thus  redeemed,  you  have  full  leave  20 

To  make  an  honourable  voyage  home. 

And  if  you  would  go  furnished  to  your  realm 

With  fair  provision,  I  do  see  a  lady, 

Methinks,  would  gladly  bear  you  company  : 

How  like  you  this  piece  ? 

H  113 


ACT  V.  sc.  s.  Philaster 

Meg.  Sir,  he  likes  it  well, 

For  he  hath  tried  it,  and  hath  found  it  worth 
His  princely  liking.     We  were  ta'en  a-bed ; 
I  know  your  meaning.     I  am  not  the  first 
That  nature  taught  to  seek  a  fellow  forth  ; 
Can  shame  remain  perpetually  in  me,  30 

And  not  in  others  ?  or  have  princes  salves 
To  cure  ill  names,  that  meaner  people  vrant  ? 

Phi.  What  mean  you  ? 

Meg.  You  must  get  another  ship, 

To  bear  the  princess  and  her  boy  together. 

Dioji.  How  now  ! 

Meg.  Others  took  me,  and  I  took  her  and  him 
At  that  all  women  may  be  ta'en  some  time  : 
Ship  us  all  four,  my  lord  ;  we  can  endure 
Weather  and  wind  alike. 

Kmg.  Clear  thou  thyself,  or  know  not  me  for  father.     40 

Are.  This  earth,  how  false  it  is  !    What  means  is  left  for  me 
To  clear  myself.''     It  lies  in  your  belief: 
My  lords,  believe  me  ;  and  let  all  things  else 
Struggle  together  to  dishonour  me. 

Bel.  Oh,  stop  your  ears,  great  King,  that  I  may  speak 
As  freedom  would  !  then  I  will  call  this  lady 
As  base  as  are  her  actions  :  hear  me,  sir  ; 
Believe  your  heated  blood  when  it  rebels 
Against  your  reason,  sooner  than  this  lady. 

Meg.  By  this  good  light,  he  bears  it  handsomely.  50 

Phi.  This  lady  !     I  will  sooner  trust  the  wind 
114 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  s 

With  feathers,  or  the  troubled  sea  with  pearl, 

Than  her  with  anything.     Believe  her  not. 

Why,  think  you,  if  I  did  believe  her  words, 

I  would  outlive  'em  ?     Honour  cannot  take 

Revenge  on  you  ;  then  what  were  to  be  known 

But  death? 
King.  Forget  her,  sir,  since  all  is  knit 

Between  us.     But  I  must  request  of  you 

One  favour,  and  will  sadly  be  denied. 
Phi.  Command,  whate'er  it  be. 
King.  Swear  to  be  true         60 

To  what  you  promise. 
Phi.  By  the  powers  above, 

Let  it  not  be  the  death  of  her  or  him, 

And  it  is  granted  ! 
King.  Bear  away  that  boy 

To  torture  :  I  will  have  her  cleared  or  buried. 
Phi.  Oh,  let  me  call  my  word  back,  worthy  sir  ! 

Ask  something  else  :  bury  my  life  and  right 

In  one  poor  grave  ;  but  do  not  take  away 

My  life  and  fame  at  once. 
King.  Away  with  him  !     It  stands  irrevocable. 
Phi.  Turn  all  your  eyes  on  me  :  here  stands  a  man,     70 

The  falsest  and  the  basest  of  this  world. 

Set  swords  against  this  breast,  some  honest  man. 

For  I  have  lived  till  I  am  pitied  ! 

My  former  deeds  were  hateful :  but  this  last 

Is  pitiful,  for  I  unwillingly 
115 


ACT  V.  sc.  5.  Philaster 

Have  given  the  dear  preserver  of  my  life 

Unto  his  tortare.     Is  it  in  the  power 

Of  flesh  and  blood  to  carry  this,  and  live  ? 

\Offers  to  stab  himself. 
Are.  Dear  sir,  be  patient  yet !     Oh,  stay  that  hand  ! 
King.  Sirs,  strip  that  boy. 
Dio7i.  Come,  sir  ;  your  tender  flesh     80 

Will  try  your  constancy. 
Bel.  Oh,  kill  me,  gentlemen  ! 

Dion.  No. — Help,  sirs. 
Bel.  Will  you  torture  me  ? 

King.  Haste  there ; 

Why  stay  you  ? 
Bel.  Then  I  shall  not  break  my  vow. 

You  know,  just  gods,  though  I  discover  all. 
Ki7ig.  How 's  that  ?  will  he  confess  ? 
Dion.  Sir,  so  he  says. 

King.  Speak  then. 
Bel.  Great  King,  if  you  command 

This  lord  to  talk  with  me  alone,  my  tongue, 

Urged  by  my  heart,  shall  utter  all  the  thoughts 

My  youth  hath  known  ;  and  stranger  things  than 
these 

You  hear  not  often. 
King.  Walk  aside  with  him.  90 

\pion  and  Bellario  walk  apart. 
Dion.  Why  speak'st  thou  not  ? 

Bel.  Know  you  this  face,  my  lord  ? 

116 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  5. 

Dion.  No. 

Bel.  Have  you  not  seen  it,  nor  the  like? 

Dion.  Yes,  I  have  seen  the  like,  but  readily 
I  know  not  where. 

Bel.  I  have  been  often  told 

In  court  of  one  Euphrasia,  a  lady, 
And  daughter  to  you  ;  betwixt  whom  and  me 
They  that  would  flatter  my  bad  face  would  swear 
There  was  such  strange  resemblance,  that  we  two 
Could  not  be  known  asunder,  drest  alike. 

Dion.  By  Heaven,  and  so  there  is  ! 

Bel.  For  her  fair  sake,    100 

Who  now  doth  spend  the  spring-time  of  her  life 
In  holy  pilgrimage,  move  to  the  King 
That  I  may  scape  this  torture. 

Dion.  But  thou  speak'st 

As  like  Euphrasia  as  thou  dost  look. 
How  came  it  to  thy  knowledge  that  she  lives 
In  pilgrimage  ? 

Bel.  I  know  it  not,  my  lord  ; 

But  I  have  heard  it,  and  do  scarce  believe  it. 

Dion.  Oh,  my  shame  !  is  it  possible  ?     Draw  near. 
That  I  may  gaze  upon  thee.     Art  thou  she. 
Or  else  her  murderer  ?  where  wert  thou  born  ?     no 

Bel.  In  Syracusa. 

Dion.  What 's  thy  name  ? 

Bel.  Euphrasia. 

Dion.  Oh,  'tis  just,  'tis  she  ! 

117 


ACT  V.  sc.  s.  Philaster 

Now  I  do  know  thee.     Oh  that  thou  hadst  died, 
And  I  had  never  seen  thee  nor  my  shame  ! 
How  shall  I  own  thee  ?  shall  this  tongue  of  mine 
E'er  call  thee  daughter  more  ? 

Bel.  Would  I  had  died  indeed  !     I  wish  it  too  : 

And  so  I  must  have  done  by  vow,  ere  published 
What  I  have  told,  but  that  there  was  no  means 
To  hide  it  longer.     Yet  I  joy  in  this,  120 

The  princess  is  all  clear. 

King.  What,  have  you  done  ? 

Dion.  All  is  discovered. 

Phi.  Why  then  hold  you  me  ? 

\Pffers  to  stab  himself. 
All  is  discovered  !     Pray  you,  let  me  go. 

King.  Stay  him. 

Are.  What  is  discovered  ? 

Dion.  Why,  my  shame. 

It  is  a  woman  :  let  her  speak  the  rest. 

Phi.  How  ?  that  again  ! 

Dion.  It  is  a  woman. 

Phi.  Blessed  be  you  powers  that  favour  innocence  ! 

King.  Lay  hold  upon  that  lady.  \Megra  is  seized. 

Phi.  It  is  a  woman,  sir  ! — Hark,  gentlemen, 

It  is  a  woman  ! — Arethusa,  take  130 

My  soul  into  thy  breast,  that  would  be  gone 
With  joy.     It  is  a  woman  !     Thou  art  fair, 
And  virtuous  still  to  ages,  in  despite 
Of  malice. 

118 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  $• 

King.  Speak  you,  where  lies  his  shame  ? 

Bel.  I  am  his  daughter. 

Phi.  The  gods  are  just. 

Dion.  I  dare  accuse  none  ;  but,  before  you  two, 
The  virtue  of  our  age,  I  bend  my  knee 
For  mercy.  \Kneels. 

Phi.  \raising  hijn."]  Take  it  freely  ;  for  I  know, 

Though  what  thou  didst  were  undiscreetly  done,  141 
'Twas  meant  well. 

Are.  And  for  me,  I  have  a  power 

To  pardon  sins,  as  oft  as  any  man 
Has  power  to  wrong  me. 

Cle.  Noble  and  worthy  ! 

Phi.  But,  Bellario 

(For  I  must  call  thee  still  so),  tell  me  why 

Thou  didst  conceal  thy  sex.     It  was  a  fault, 

A  fault,  Bellario,  though  thy  other  deeds 

Of  truth  outweighed  it :  all  these  jealousies 

Had  flown  to  nothing,  if  thou  hadst  discovered    150 

What  now  we  know. 

Bel.  My  father  oft  would  speak 

Your  worth  and  virtue  ;  and,  as  I  did  grow 
More  and  more  apprehensive,  I  did  thirst 
To  see  the  man  so  raised.     But  yet  all  this 
Was  but  a  maiden-longing,  to  be  lost 
As  soon  as  found  ;  till,  sitting  in  my  window, 
Printing  my  thoughts  in  lawn,  I  saw  a  god, 
I  thought  (but  it  was  you),  enter  our  gates  : 
119 


ACT  V.  sc.  s.  Philaster 

My  blood  flew  out  and  back  again,  as  fast 
As  I  had  puffed  it  forth  and  sucked  it  in  i6o 

Like  breath  :  then  was  I  called  away  in  haste 
To  entertain  you.     Never  was  a  man, 
Heaved  from  a  sheep-cote  to  a  sceptre,  raised 
So  high  in  thoughts  as  I  :  you  left  a  kiss 
Upon  these  lips  then,  which  I  mean  to  keep 
From  you  for  ever :  I  did  hear  you  talk, 
Far  above  singing.     After  you  were  gone, 
I  grew  acquainted  with  my  heart,  and  searched 
What  stirred  it  so  :  alas,  I  found  it  love  ! 
Yet  far  from  lust ;  for,  could  I  but  have  lived       170 
In  presence  of  you,  I  had  had  my  end. 
For  this  I  did  elude  my  noble  father 
With  a  feigned  pilgrimage,  and  dressed  myself 
In  habit  of  a  boy  ;  and,  for  I  knew 
My  birth  no  match  for  you,  I  was  past  hope 
Of  having  you  ;  and,  understanding  well 
That  when  I  made  discovery  of  my  sex 
I  could  not  stay  with  you,  I  made  a  vow, 
By  all  the  most  religious  things  a  maid 
Could  call  together,  never  to  be  known,  180 

Whilst  there  was  hope  to  hide  me  from  men's  eyes, 
For  other  than  I  seemed,  that  I  might  ever 
Abide  with  you.     Then  sat  I  by  the  fount, 
Where  first  you  took  me  up. 
King.  Search  out  a  match 

Within  our  kingdom,  where  and  when  thou  wilt, 
120 


Philaster  act  v.  sc.  s 

And  I  will  pay  thy  dowry  ;  and  thyself 
Wilt  well  deserve  him. 

Bel.  Never,  sir,  will  I 

Marry  ;  it  is  a  thing  within  my  vow  : 
But,  if  I  may  have  leave  to  serve  the  princess, 
To  see  the  virtues  of  her  lord  and  her,  190 

I  shall  have  hope  to  live. 

Arc.  I,  Philaster, 

Cannot  be  jealous,  though  you  had  a  lady 
Drest  like  a  page  to  serve  you  ;  nor  will  I 
Suspect  her  living  here. — Come,  live  with  me  ; 
Live  free  as  I  do.    She  that  loves  my  lord. 
Cursed  be  the  wife  that  hates  her  ! 

Phi.  I  grieve  such  virtue  should  be  laid  in  earth 
Without  an  heir. — Hear  me,  my  royal  father  : 
Wrong  not  the  freedom  of  our  souls  so  much. 
To  think  to  take  revenge  of  that  base  woman  ;    200 
Her  malice  cannot  hurt  us.     Set  her  free 
As  she  was  born,  saving  from  shame  and  sin. 

King.  Set  her  at  liberty.     But  leave  the  court ; 
This  is  no  place  for  such. — You,  Pharamond, 
Shall  have  free  passage,  and  a  conduct  home 
Worthy  so  great  a  prince.     When  you  come  there 
Remember  'twas  your  faults  that  lost  you  her, 
And  not  my  purposed  wilh 

Pha.  I  do  confess, 

Renowned  sir.  209 

King,  Last,  join  your  hands  in  one.     Enjoy,  Philaster, 
121 


ACT  V.  sc.  5.  Philaster 

This  kingdom,  which  is  yours,  and,  after  me, 
Whatever  I  call  mine.     My  blessing  on  you  ! 
All  happy  hours  be  at  your  marriage-joys, 
That  you  may  grow  yourselves  over  all  lands, 
Aod  live  to  see  your  plenteous  branches  spring 
Wherever  there  is  sun  !     Let  princes  learn 
By  this  to  rule  the  passions  of  their  blood  ; 
For  what  Heaven  wills  can  never  be  withstood. 

[Exeu7:t, 


122 


GLOSSARY 


Abused,  deceived ;  i.  i.  325  ;  in.  1. 
105. 

Answerable,  suitable,  convenient ; 
IV.  ii.  32. 

Apprehensive,  capable    of  under- 
standing ;    IV.  ii.  32.     Cf.  Julius 
Ccesar,  in.  i.  67  : — 
'  Men  are  flesh  and   blood,  and 
apprehensive.' 

Articles,  makes  terms  with ;  iv. 
ii.  32. 

Basilisk,  a  fabulous  serpent  sup- 
posed to  kill  by  its  look  ;  i.  ii.  70  ; 
IV.  iii.  29. 

Bellied,  swollen,  extravagant ;  i. 
i.  234. 

Bills,  pikes  with  hooked  points ; 
v.  iv.  31. 

Blanks,  blank  verses  ;  11.  ii.  97. 

Bolted,  started  off,  escaped;  11.  ii. 

9- 

Branch,  embroider,  make  patterns 
over  ;  v.  iii.  144  ;  v.  iv.  42. 

Brave,  gaily  dressed,  11.  iv.  25 ; 
III.  i.  157. 

Bravery,  ostentation  ;  i.  i.  264. 

Bugs,  objects   of  terror;  i.   i.   235. 
Cf.  3  Henry  VI.,  ii.  2  :— 
'  For  Warwick  was  a  bug  that 
feared  us  all. ' 

Bug's-words,  terrifying,  high- 
sounding  words ;  v.  iv.  28. 

Cantharides,  a  drug  consisting  of 
dried  Spanish  flies;  iv.  i.  41. 


Carduus,  thistle ;  11.  ii.  43._ 

Carriage,  behaviour;  11.  iv.  113; 
baggage,  iv.  i.  38. 

Circumstances,  circumstantial  de- 
tails; III.  i.  134. 

Cloudy,  gloomy  ;  iv.  i.  3. 

Church-ale,  festival  to  commemo- 
rate the  dedication  of  a  church  ; 
v.  iv.  55. 

Cog,  cheat ;  i.  1.  59. 

Conster,  construe  ;  11.  i.  8. 

Crossly,  unsuitably,  inauspi- 
ciously  ;   11.  iv.  53. 

Curious,  scrupulous;  iii.  i.  2c. 

Curst,  cross ;  11.  iii.  35.    Cf.  Muck 
Ado  about  Nothing,  11.  i.  22  : — 
'  r  faith  she  's  too  curst.' 

Dowcets,  testes ;  iv.   ii.  13  ;  v.  iv. 

62. 
DucKERS,  bowing,   cringing   shop- 
men ;  V.  iv.  14. 
DuLNESS,  sleepiness;  iv.  iv.  6.     Cf. 
The  Tempest,  i.  ii.  185  :— 
'  Thou  art  inclined  to  sleep :  'tis 
a  good  dulness. 
And  give  it  way. 

Elder-gun,  a  popgun  made  of 
elder-wood  by  extracting  the 
pith  ;  I.  i.  226. 

Epithalamium,  a   bridal  song  ;  v. 


Followers,  pursuers;  iv.  iv.  33. 


123 


GLOSSARY 


Philaster 


Fox,  a  broadsword ;  IV.  iii.  131. 
Derived  probably  from  the  mark 
on  the  blade.  Cf.  Webster,  The 
White  Devil  :— 

'O  what  blade  is't? 
A  Toledo,  or  an  English  fox  ? ' 

Galloon-laces,  pieces  of  close 
lace  for  binding,  originally  of 
worsted.  From  Spanish  galon  = 
finery. 

Hectors,  martial    fellows;    v.  iv. 

32- 
Honest,  chaste  ;  11.  ii.  5  *,  iv.  u.  23. 
Humour,  moisture  ;  v.  lii.  31. 

Jag,  cut  or  slash ;  v.  iv.  43. 
Jealous,  suspicious  ;  11.  iv.  14,  etc. 

Kell,    the     caul    about    a    hart's 

paunch  ;  v.  iv.  45. 
Kit,  a  small  violin  ;  v.  iv.  70. 

Leg,  a  bow  ;  i.  1.  80. 

Lime-hound,  a  hunting  dog,  so 
called  from  the  lyatn,  or  lym,  by 
which  it  was  led.  In  King  Lear, 
III.  vi.  67,  lytn  is  used  of  the  dog 
itself. 

Lodged,  entrapped,  brought  to 
covert ;  iv.  ii.  i. 

Minion,  favourite  at  court ;  i.  i.  311. 
Murrains,  plagues  ;  v.  iii.  142. 
MuRRioNS,  steel  caps  ;  v.  iv.  92. 

Outlandish,  foreign  ;  i.  I.  205. 

Parcels,  pieces  ;  v.  iv.  77. 
Physical,     good    for    the    health, 
salutary  ;  iv.    i.  24.      Cf.  Julius 
Cessar,  11.  i.  261  :— 

'  Is  it  physical 
To  walk  unbraced,  and  suck  up 

the  humours 
Of  the  dank  morning  ?' 


Pollard,  a  stag  which  has  cast  its 

horns  ;  V.  iv.  82. 
Popinjays,  parrots  ;  i.  \.  206. 
Present,  immediate  ;  11.  iv.  87. 
Prevent,  anticipate  ;  i.  ii.  195. 
Prodigious,  portentous,  ill-omened; 

II.  iv.  166  ;  v.  iii.  60. 
PouLTER,  poulterer;  v.  iv.  37. 
Pyramis,  pyramid  ;  iv.  iv.  90. 

Quick,  alive  ;  i.  i.  171. 

Ravkl,    to    become    disjoined    or 

frayed;  v.  iv.  44. 
Resolved,  assured  ;  11.  iv.  95.  ^  _ 
Ring-tail,  a  kite  with  a  whitish 

tail  ;  v.  iv.  57. 
Roarers,        blustering        fellows, 

bullies  ;  V.  iv.  90. 

Sarcenet,  a  fine,  thin,  silk  fabric— 

literally  '  Saracen-stuff' ;  v.  iv.  56. 
Sconce,  head  ;  v.  iii.  177. 
Servants,  lovers;  i.  i.  119. 
Several,  separate,  different ;  I.  ii. 

116. 
Slip,  a  leash  or  noose  for  holding  a 

dog  ;  IV.  i.  15. 
Stone-eow,     a     cross-bow    which 

shoots  stones  ;  iv.  ii.  9.     _ 
Surcingle,  a  band  for  pinioning  a 

hawk ;  v.  iv.  129. 

Tainted,  affected  in   mind ;    i.   I. 
212. 

Tender'st,  carest  for  ;  iii.  i.  279. 

Tiller,  a  cross-bow  ;  11.  ii.  45. 

TowsABEL,  a  jeering  alteration  of 
Dowsabel  (the  reading  of  Q.  i),  a 
common  name  of  pastoral  heroines, 
derived  from  Fr.  donee  et  belle. 
Cf.  Drayton,  Eel.,  iv.  :— 
'  He  had,  as  antique  stories  tell, 
A  daughter  cleaped  Dowsabel.' 


124 


Philaster 


GLOSSARY 


Toy,  whim ;  v.  iii.  136.  Cf.  Hamlet t 
I.  iii.  6  : — 
•  For  Hamlet  and  the  trifling  of 

his  favour, 
Hold  it  a  fashion  and  a  toy  in 
blood.' 
Travels,  labours  ;  i.  i.  153. 
Troul,  to  shout  tumultuously  ;   iv. 

iii.  134. 
Turtle,  a  dove  ;  i.  1.  209. 

Venerv,  hunting ;  iv.  ii.  16. 

What-ye-lacks,  shopmen,  so  called 


from  their  customary  cry  to  the 
passers-by  ;  v.  iii.  123. 
Water-camlets,       rich      fabrics, 
made  of    silk,     wool,    or    other 
materials,  with  a  wavy  or  watered 
appearance;  v.  iv.  9.      Cf.   Hol- 
land's Pliny,  I.  228 : — 
'  The    waved     water  _  Chamelot 
was    from   the   beginning    es- 
teemed the  richest  and  bravest 
wearing.' 
Wiper,    a     steel     instrument     for 
cleaning  the  bore  of  a  musket ; 
V.  iv.  37. 


125 


NOTES 

Q.  I  =  Quarto  of  1620.  Q.  6= Quarto  of  1652. 

Q.  2=        ,,        1622.  Q.  7=        ,,        1660. 

Q.  3=        „        1628.  Q.  8=        „        1687. 

Q.  4=        „        1634.  Q.  9=        ..        1717. 

Q.  5=         ,,         1639.  F.  =  Folio  of  1679. 

In  the  old  texts,  from  1628  onwards,  the  scene  of  the  play  is  simply 
given  as  'Cicilie.'  Dyce  substituted  'Messina  and  its  neighbour- 
hood.'   His  stage-directions  have  been  adopted  throughout. 

I.  i.  42.  Pleased;  this  (with  the  variant  z^€i\\vig,  fleasde),  is  the 
reading  of  all  the  texts.  Dyce  asks,  'Can  the  true  reading  be 
released!'  but  the  original  text  gives  a  sufficiently  satisfactory 
meaning. 

Stage-direction,  Enter  Galatea,  a  Lady,  and  Megra.  In  the  old 
texts  the  order  is  Galatea,  Megra,  and  a  Lady,  but  the  alteration 
is  necessar}',  as  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Dion's  speech,  11.  57-66, 
applies  to  Megra.  The  old  texts  further,  in  the  lines  that  follow, 
mistakenly  assign  to  the  Lady  the  words  of  Megra,  and  vice  versa  ; 
hence  Q.  3,  and  following  early  editions,  add  to  the  list  of  dramatis 
personce,  '  An  old  wanton  Lady  or  Croane.' 

I.  i.  112.    To  speak  :  Q.  2  reads  To  talk  of. 

I.  i.  145.  By  more  than  all  the  gods  :  This  is  the  reading  of  Q.'s 
1,  2,  3,  and  8.  Q.'s  4,  5,  6,  7,  9,  and  F.  read  '  By  more  than  all 
my  hopes.' 

I.  i.  150.  Opine',  this  is  the  reading  of  F.  and  Q.  9,  and  has 
been  generally  adopted  by  modern  editors.  But  it  does  not  give 
126 


Philaster  notes 

an  entirely  satisfactor}'  sense.     The  other  Q.'s  read  open,  which  is 
unintelligible. 
I.  i.  186-190.  In  the  old  texts  the  passage  is  printed : — 

'  This  earth  you  tread  upon 
(A  dowry  as  you  hope  with  this  fair  Princess 
Whose  memory  I  bow  to)  was  not  left 
By  my  dead  father  (oh,  I  had  a  father) 
To  your  inheritance.' 

I.  i.  205.  Looks  like  a  tooth-drawer.  Ray  in  his  Proverbs  inter- 
prets this  as  looking  '  very  thin  and  meagre.' 

I.  i.  218-219.  To  him,  That  made  the  world  his  :  Alexander  the 
Great. 

I.  i.  242.  A  pattej-n  of  succession :  a  pattern  to  succeeding 
kings. 

I.  i.  247.  A  prince  of  wax :  well  made,  as  if  modelled  in  wax. 
Cf.  the  Nurse's  description  of  Paris  as  '  a  man  of  wax  '  {Romeo 
and  Juliet,  I.  iii.).  Galatea's  retort,  a  dog  it  is,  refers  to  the  cant 
phrase  of  the  day,  '  a  dog  of  wax,'  the  meaning  of  which  is  obscure. 

I.  i.  253.  Nothing  hopes  and  fears  :  this  is  the  reading  of  Q.'s  i, 
2,  3,  and  8.  The  other  texts  have  nought  but  hopes  a?id fears.  In 
either  case  there  seems  some  corruption. 

I.  i.  255.  And  right  me:  this,  the  reading  of  Q.'s  i  and  2,  is 
preferable  on  metrical  grounds  to  and  right  me  not,  the  reading  of 
the  later  texts. 

I.  i.  265.  A  true  tenant:  this  is  the  reading  of  all  the  texts 
except  Q.  i,  which  has  a  true  truant.  This,  in  spite  of  the  jingle, 
gives  a  more  satisfactory  meaning.     Milford  conjectured  recreant. 

I,  i.  313.  If  I  could :  the  old  texts  read  If  you  could. 

I.  i.  322.  Injuries :  Q.  i  alone  reads  virtues. 

I.  ii.  116.  Flowers  bred  in  the  vale  :  this  is  the  reading  of  Q.  i, 
and  it  gives  an  intelligible  sense,  though  no  mention  has  been  made 
127 


NOTES  Philaster 

in  the  previous  lines  of  a  '  vale.'  The  older  texts  read  bred  in  the 
bay,  of  which  no  satisfactory  interpretation  seems  possible.  Mason 
thought  that  the  words  meant  '  woven  in  the  garland,'  but  there  is 
no  instance  of  ^r<fd?^= braid  having  a  strong  past  participle. 

II.  ii.  26.  This  win:  part  of  a  woman's  head-dress.  Cf.  Jonson's 
Silent  Woman,  '  It  dropt  all  my  wire  and  my  ruff  with  wax  candle,' 
and  Middleton's  Michaelmas  Term,  '  A  narrow-eared  wire  sets  out 
a  cheek  so  fat  and  so  full. ' 

II.  ii.  61.    White  money  :  'a  cant  term  for  silver  specie '  (Dyce). 

II.  ii.  65.  Camphire  constitutions.  Camphire  was  considered 
pre-eminently  cold. 

II.  iii.  26.  Was  never  altered  \  this  is  the  reading  of  the  Quartos, 
and  should  be  retained.  The  use  of  a  singular  verb  after  a  plural 
substantive  is  common  in  Elizabethan  English.    F.  alone  reads  were. 

II.  iv.  92.  Makes  :  the  reading  of  all  the  old  texts.  Cf.  previous 
note. 

n.  iv.  99.  Renegadoes :  the  Spanish  renegade  was  used  through- 
out the  seventeenth  century  with  the  meaning,  'apostate,'  'turn- 
coat.' Cf.  Twelfth  Night,  ill.  ii.  63,  '  Malvolio  is  turned  heathen, 
a  very  renegado.'  It  seems  here  to  be  loosely  used  in  the  sense 
of  '  treacherous  intruders,'  or  perhaps,  '  rufhans.* 

II.  iv.  123.  Ride  a  stage:  the  reading  of  Q.  i,  and  evidently 
correct.  The  majority  of  the  other  editions  read  a  stagge,  while 
Q.  8  has  stag,  and  Q.  6  and  F.  stagg.  There  is  an  allusion  to  the 
necessity,  at  the  period,  of  obtaining  a  warrant  for  the  hire  of  post- 
horses. 

II.  iv.  178.  Nine  worthies :  Joshua,  Judas  Maccabaeus,  David, 
Alexander  the  Great,  Hector,  Julius  Caesar,  Charlemagne,  Godfrey 
of  Bouillon,  and  King  Arthur. 

III.  i.  23.  Bulls  of  brass :  an  allusion  to  the  brazen  bull  of  Phalaris. 
III.  i.  106.  For  bursting:  for  fear  of  bursting.     It  was  popularly
