Canonical Title: LOVE'S MISTRESS
Requested Title: LOVE'S MISTRESS
Authors: Thomas Heywood
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: lovesmistressor00goldgoog
Item Title: Love's Mistress: Or, The Queen's Masque
Item Creator: Thomas Heywood , Edmund Goldsmid
Item Year: 1886
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: LOVE'S MISTRESS
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/lovesmistressor00goldgoog/lovesmistressor00goldgoog_djvu.txt
LOVE'S MISTRESS; 



OR 



Wbc ^ueen'0 Miaeque. 




f\ 



ms edition is limited to 2y^ small-paper copies^ 
and 75" large-paper copies. 






BMtot|)eca Curioga^/ 



Xove'6 ^tettess; 



OR THE 



QUEEN'S MASQUE, 



BY 



THOMAS HEYWOOI). 
1640. 



Blrttelr bs 
EDMUND GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S., 
F.S.A. (Scot). 



PRIVATELY PRINTED, EDINBURGH. 

1886. 



A 






HARVARD 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 



DRAMMATIS PERSONyE, 



Apuleius "I r„, ^, 

Midas. I |The Chorus. 

Admetus, King of Thessaly. 

Astioche, ^ i 

Petrea, |- \ His three Daughters. 

Psiche, j V 

Menetius, ") T Husbands to Petrea and 

Zelotes, J 1 Astioche. 



Venus. 


Rhadamant. 


Cupid. 


Charon. 


Pan. 


Cerberus. 


Apollo. 


Zephirus. 


Mercury. 


Boreas. 


Vulcan. 


Furies. 


Pluto. 


Four Ciclops. 


Proserpine. 


The Clown. 


Minos. 


Amarillis a she Swain. 


Eacus. 


Four Swaines. 



<5<*^-^ 'Six 



TO THE 

RIGHT HONOURABLE 

EDWARD 

EARL OF DORSET, 

Lord Chamberlain to the Queens Most 

Excellent Majesty^ Knight of the Noble 

Order of the Garter^ and one of His 

Majesties Most Honorable Privy 

Council, 

Right Honorable, 
^T having pleased Her Most Excellent Majesty* 
# to grace this (although unworthy) Poem so 
^ often with Her Royal presence, I was em- 
^ boldened the rather (though I dare not 
commend) yet to commit it to your Noble Patron- 
age, neither are Dramma's of this nature, so 
despicable, as to be held unworthy the coun- 
tenance of great men, when there is frequent 

* Henrietta Maria. 



6 7 he EphtU Dedicatory, 

president that the like have been Dedicated to, 
and entertained by Emperors, and the most 
Potent Princes of their times. If your Honour 
shall daign the acceptance of a plain mans love, 
and observance in this Presentment, as you grace 
the Work, so you shall much encourage the 
Author, who humbly takes his leave of your Lord- 
ship, with that borrowed from the excellent Poet 
Nemesianus Engl. I. 

" o Dignus senior quern Carmine Phoebus, 

Pan Calamis, Fidibus, Linus, Modulantibus Orpheus, 
Concinerent." 

THOMAS HEYWOOD. 






TO THE READER. 

— ^'m^fi — 

Generous Reader, 

rOR this Dramatick Poem, I need not much 
Apologie ; It having passed so many Tests 
r.0^ of Approbation, yet for commendable Cus- 
^^ toms sake I follow the tradition of all or 
most Authors, who were never deficient in this 
kinde of complement : The Argument is taken 
from Apuleius,* an excellent Morral, if truly 
understood, and may be called a golden Truth, 
contained in a leaden fable, which though it be 
not altogether conspicuous to the vulgar, yet to 
those of Learning and judgement, no less appre- 
hended in the Paraphrase, than approved in the 
Original : of which, if the perusers hereof were all 
Apuleians, and never a Midas amongst them, I 
should make no question : So much for the Sub- 

*In his "Golden Ass," Apuleius introduces the 
episode of Cupid and Psyche, depicting in an allegory 
the yearning of the soul for perfection ; this is the 
" moral " here alluded to. 



8 T0 the Reader, 

ject it self, but for the rare decorements which 
new apparrell'd it, when it came the second time 
to the Royal view, (Her Gracious Majesty then 
entertaining his Highness at Denmark -house, upon 
his Birth-day) I cannot pretermit to give a due 
Character to that admirable Artist, Mr Inego 
Jones, Master -surveyor of the Kings work, &c.. 
Who to every Act, nay almost to every Sceane, 
by his excellent Inventions, gave such an extra- 
ordinary Lustre; upon every occasion changing 
the stage, to the admiration of all the Spec- 
tators: that, as I must ingeniously confess, it 
was above my apprehension to conceive, so to 
their scared Majesties, and the rest of the 
Auditory; It gave so general a content, that I 
presume they never parted from any object 
presented in that kinde, better pleased, or more 
plenally satisfied : But these I leave to your judge- 
ments to ghesse at ; the thing it self I propose to 
your eyes, to censure, which if you judge as 
favourably as I express it freely, I shall ever 
remain as heretofore : 

Studious of your best opinions, 

THO. IIEYWOOD. 



The Prologue to this Play, the first time 

it was Presented on the Stage ; Cupid 

descending in a Cloud, the Speaker. 

T was a Custom 'mongst the Romanes, when 
State-Ladies they invited, or great men, 
As if their doors were all too base, and vile 
To entertain them ; their large Roofes to 
untile, 
And their unbonnded welcome more to crown. 
In Artificial Cloudes to let them down ; 
Their superstitious Love so far extending, 
Receiving them as gods from heaven descending. 
Although we cannot meet you with like state. 
As entring hither at our publike gate. 
You are as welcome ; 'Tis Love bids you so : 
And, as their use was, to their ghests to show 
Their best, and costliest Jewels (without boast. 
So Cupid will) what he affecteth most. 
His sweet and dearest Mistris ; or if ought 
Were more in valuation, or in thought. 
That you should see : She is both fresh and new, 
Then bid her but as welcome, as I, you. 




10 LOVES MISTRIS. 

Her Majesty inviting the King to Denmark 
House, in the Strand, uix)n his Birth- 
day, being November the 19.* 

This Play (bearing from that time) the Title of the 

Queens Masque^ was again presented before 

Him : Csf^^ speaking the Prologue. 

^HO'S so un-read, doth not of Plato hear, 
His Annus Magnus^ or this Vertent year ; 
In which the Stars and Planets, Moon, 
and Sun, 

Tyr'd with continual labour, having run 
So many Ages long peregrination, 
And returnes fresh and new to It's first station. 

This is that year sure j rather this the day. 
Able to change f November into May: 
This day*s in heaven a Jubylee of Joy, 
Where Angels sing in quires, Vive la Roy. 
This is the Royal Birth-day of a King, 
Then men with Angels lo p^ean sing. 

I had almost lost my self, when my intent 
Was to tell why I come, and from whom sent : 
From One, to whom I'm but a shadow. She 
The very soul of Amabilitee. 
One, that without my quiver and my bow, 

* Charles I. was born November 19th, 1600. 
+ Thc text reads charge. 



LOVES MIST&IS. II 

Commands the hearts and eyes, of high and low, 
Whose name (Inscribed here) did you but behold, 
'Twould change the sooty Ink, to liquid Gold 
Of fulgent beauty ; but so pure a mind, 
As if tinctur'd from Heaven, and so devin'd. 
I Love, from Love am sent, but She the right : 
Then grace (Great King) the Triumphs of Loves 
night. 




The Epilogue, spoken by Cupid^ pointing 
to the several Plannets. 

OW Royal Princes, let me turn to you, 
Daign from Loves mouth, to take this 

nights adieu : 
Think all these Plannets that on earth here 
move, 
(Shadows of those Ccelestial ones above) 
Breath on you their best Influences ; Vulcan he, 
Shall henceforth take charge of your Armory. 
Juno the Marriage Queen, shall bless your bed : 
The Sun shall take the bright beames from his 

head, 
To increase your glories lusture : and the Moon, 
Attend on you, to make your mid -night noon : 
And Mercury shall roam from shore to shore 
Upon your errands, prove your happy ranger, 
Home-bred to spie and foresee forraign danger : 



12 LOTBS MISTRIS. 

Venus with sweets, and I with Jove will charm 

you; 
And after all these, Jove with Power shall arm you. 
I have kept you waking long, good night, 'tis 
late, 
And many Birth-days may you Celebrate. 



The Prologue to the King and Queen, the 
Second time it was Acted, the same 

Week : 

Spoken by Cupid, 

fES ; sure 'twas here : where some few hours 
I past, 
^^^ The very time that I descended last ; 
^^ I, here it was, I know it by one face. 
To which my Mistris Psiche must give place. 
A presence ; that from Venus takes all power, 
And makes each place she comes in Cupids bower. 
Though in their several spheres, each Planet ride, 
(With all the gods) to feast me and my bride, 
With Nectar and Ambrosia, yet, that waste 
Of godly fare could not my pallat taste: 
But I must all Caelestial sweet forbear, 
To re-view earthly Jove, and Juno here, 
Whom having seen ; Hail to you once again ; 
Long as the spheres continue, may you Raign 



LOVES MISTRIS. 1 3 

In Majesty, in power, in issue blest, 
Be all these with your fortunate yeers increast : 
Till Cupid (ever yong) with Time grow old. 
And you, this Iron Age, changing to gold. 
(Re-pur'd by your two vertues) These etherial. 
May change to brighter Chaires in th' Heavens 
Imperial. 







iOVES MiSTiaiS, 



ACT. I. SCEN. I. 

(Enter Apuleius^ with a pair ofasse ears in his 

hand,) 

80W art thou Apuleius retransfonnM? or else 
how cam'st thou metamorphis'd first into 
Q^^yQ an Asse ? Why to so dull a beast, of slow, 
^ and so obtuse a memory ? I had a brain 
aimM at inscrutable things, beyond the Moon ; 
what was sublunary, me thought was for my study 
all too mean : (therefore, I)* therefore was I thus 
transhap'd : that knowing man who keeps not in 
his bounds, but pries into heavens hidden Myslerie, 
Further than leave, his dulness is increast, 
Ceaseth to be a man, and so turns beast : 

And thus I fell, yet by the self same power, 
that calls all humane wisdomf foolishness, am 
once more to my pristine shape restor'd ; 

* These words, given in the text, should be omitted, 
•f* The text reads ivisdtmy. 



LOVES MISTRIS. 15 

Onely to show how vain my ambitions were, 
This follies crest I still about me bear : 

I fain would know the way to Helicon, 
Can none here tell me ? Will none silence breake? 
It seems these sit to hear then, not to speak, 

{Enter Midas*) 

Here's one I hope can tell nte : Reverend 
Father, how lies my journey to the Muses hill ? 

Mi, Follow thy nose. 

Ap. Thou most unreverend groom, (I hope my 
Asses shape is quite shook oflf) why in this churlish 
manner speak*st thou then ? 

J/af. The Muses ? hang the Muses. Ap, Cans' t 
thou conduct 

My wandring steps to Aganippe spring ? 
To the Muses Temple I am travelling 

And must to them perform a sacrifice, f 

Mi. An Assehead of thy own, thou must per- 
form. Ap, If men be grown thus savage ; oh 
you powers, Remetamorphise me into an asse ; 'tis 
less inglorious, and less grief to live a beast 
amoagst wilde beasts, then to see man bruite-like 
to blemish his creation. 

Mi, I tell thee once again, I know no Muses ; 



* For preferring Pan's pipes to Apollo's lyre, the 
latter god caused Midas to have the ears of an ass. 

t The text reads sacnfic. 



t6 LOVES MISIUS. 

DO Muses hill, do .\ganippes spring ; and which is 
more, I care for no such toyes. 

Ap. And which is witrst, none wise shall care 
for thee; 

Oh grief, that silver hairs should crown his head. 
By whom the Muses are dishonoured. 
Say Idol, what's thy nan^ ? Aft, Wliat's that 
to thee ? yet was I sometime King of Phr^ia, to 
whom god Bacchus was beholding once : and 
therefore bad me ask what I would have, I should 
be granted ; instantly I begg*d that whatsoere I 
touch'd might turn to Gold ; at first it pleased me : 
when I sate to eat, I touch'd the Table, and it 
straight was gold, the trenchers gold : I call'd for 
earthen vessels, which by my touch were alcumis'd 
to gold, all which I hugg'd ; but when I came to 
carve, even as the dishes, so the meat was gold, 
the liquid wine, but touch'd, was straight con- 
gealed : 

And had not Bacchus freed me from my wish. 
Amidst my gold I had been starv'd * ere this. 

Ap. Dull covetous fool. Mi, The shame of 
this made me resigne my state, and where before I 
was a King of men, to flie the harshnes of fools 
bitter jeasts, I am this wool! crown, and am King 
of beasts, and my name's Midas. 

Ap, Then oh King of beasts, 



The original reads ** strav'd." 



LOVES MISTRIS. 17 

Be this thy curse ; when thy base life's out-worn, 

No sacred Poet name thee but in scorn : 

But wilt thou sit with silence? Mi, Thou 

prat'st and bablest, what would'st thou have roe 

do ? Ap, Seest thou this sphear spangled with all 

these stars, all these Love-arts ; nor shall they 

part from hence with unfeasted cares : my purpose 

was to expose them to the shapes of all those 

asses, 

With whom my lost soul wandred in a mist, 

Knowing of them thou art not counted least. 

But first I'le shew a story of mine own of Cupids 

love to Psiche, sit and see't ; I'll make thee then 

ingeniously confess thy treason 'gainst the Muses 

Majesty ; 

Withal, not onely whatsoever's mine, 

But all true Poets raptures are divine. 

Mi, Thou hast prevail'd with me, by Pan I'll 
stay : 

But take heed Poet that your rimes be sound, 
Else with thine own asse ears thou shaU be 
crown'd. 

Ap, We two contend ; Art here, there Ignor- 
ance : 
Be you the Judges, we invite you all 
Unto this banquet Accademicall. [Exeuttt' 

{/Recorders, Enter Admeius, Meiietiusy Zeiotis^ 
Astioche, Petrea^ Psiche.) 

Ad, You Peers and Daughters to th' Arcadian 



l8 LOVBS MISTRIS. 

King, we have past the greai'st port of our Pil- 
grimage : listen, oh listen, for these sounds that 
gnild the airs light wings, fanning through all oar 
ears immortal tunes, tell us we are arived at 
sacred Delphos ; see the burnish'd Spires advance 
themselves to welcome our approach : the Temple 
gates stand ope, and that great Deity, whose 
tongue speaks nothing less than Oracle, attended 
by his Sibels, daines to appear. 

{Enter Apollo,) 
Mem, Oh teach our knees with a most reverent 
touch, to kiss this hallowed earth, ^ieh. Ladies 
kneel down. Astio, And sir relate to fair Lato- 
naes Son, why this religious voyage was attempted. 
Ad, Daughters I shall : 
Sacred Apollo, god of Archery, 
Of Arts, of Physick, and of Poetry : 
Joves blight hair'd Son, whose yellow tresses shine 
Like curled flames, hurling a most divine 
And dazling splendor on these lesser fires. 
Which from thy guilt beams, when thy Carre 

retires, 
Kindle those tapers that lend eyes to night ; 
Oh thou that art the Landlord of all light : 
Bridegroom to morning, daies eternal King, 
To whom Nine Muses in a sacred ring. 
In dances spherical, trip hand in hand. 
Whilst thy well stringed Harp their feet com- 
mand; 



LOV£S MISTRIS. 1 9 

Great Delphian Priest, we to adore thy name 
Have burnt fat thighs of Bulls in hallowed flame, 
Whose savor wrapt in clouds of smoke and fire, 
To thy Star spangled pallace durst aspire : 
Tell us who shall untie the Virgin Zone 
Of the white handed Psiche, she alone 
Of three most fair, is most unfortunate, 
All love, but none her love will celebrate 
With nuptial rights ; what must of her betide, 
Dread Phebus tell, to whom shall be bride. 

Ap: Cloath Psiche in a morning weed, then 
lead and leave her on a hill, when Venus Doves 
their young ones feed, her husband not of humane 
race ; but one, whose flaming sight doth kill, and 
yet wants eyes : his serpents face if she behold, 
she must see hell, and yet by some notorious deed, 
obtain a Patent from that place never to die : 
Psiche farewel. Much joy*d, much griev'd, un- 
clasp that spell. \_Ex, Apollo, 

Ad, Much griev'd, and yet much joy'd, poor 
girle, I fear 
The scale of grief will weigh down that of cheer. 

Mene, She must see hell, and yet she nere shall 
die ; 
True, for hels torments live eternally, 

Asii, But father, no tongue shall her joyes 
express. 

Petre, Phebus, thy words leave us all comfort- 
less. 



90 LOTES MISTRIS. 

Psi» I mast espoose a serpent, that's my hell. 

Zelo. But since you never shall behold his face. 
Your torments cannot be too horrible. 

Mene, Is't possible, by deeds impossible 
To attain the Crown of immortality : 
It cannot be : thus mocking Phebus leave us, 
Alwayes in clouds of darkness to deceive us. 

Ad, Stay thy prophane tongue, lest deserved 
wrath, strick thee with death from his 
revengeful sphear : 
Thou must be cloath'd in mourning, so thou art, 
A mourning habite, and a thought-sick heart : 
Thou must be left alone on Venus hill : 
The destinies decree, we must fulfil : 
Thy husband must want sight, and yet have eyes 
That flame, and kill ; oh leave these mysteries. 
Until the gods reveal them, come, let's hence : 
Changes your Arcadian tunes to Lidian sounds. 
Sad notes are sweetest, where deep woe con- 
founds. [Ex omnes, 

{.Recorders, Enter Venus,) 

Ven, Cupid my Son, where's he? [within,* 

Cup, Anon forsooth. Venus. I'le gather rods 

of Roses, if you mock me with your anon- 

forsooth : [wUhin, 



* Or, as we ihould say in modem stage parlance^ 
** in the wings." 



LOTBS MISTRIS. 21 

Cup» Anon-forsooth : Ven, Shall I be thus still 
vext? still when my blood boyles in the fire of 
anger, then this ape with purpose frets me. — 
Boy. 

{Enter Cupid,) 

Cup. Anon-forsooth : Ven, Will Juno come, 
or Ceres ? 

Cup, Juno lay lolling in my Uncles lap. Ven, 
Which Uncle ? 

Cup, Uncle Jove : I laught out-right to see 
how (wanton-like) with both her arms, she clung 
about his neck ; gave him ten kisses, toy'd with 
his locks, look'd babies in his eyes, and swore she 
would not watch him when he went among his 
wenches, if he'd tiurn away his sawcy page, the 
smooth-fac'd Ganimed ; the boy by chance upon 
her fan had spilt a cup of Nectar, oh how Juno 
swore ! 

I told my Aunt I'de give her a new fan. 
To let loves page be Cupids serving-man. 

Ven, What's this to Venus message, what said 
Juno? 

Cup, I ask'd her when she'd come, and in good 
sooth. 
She answered nothing, but anon forsooth. 

Ven, And where was Ceres, what did she 
reply? 

Cup, Ceres was binding garlands for god Pan, 
of blew-bottles, and yellow pissabeds that grew 



12 LOnS MISTKIS. 

amongst the Wheat, with which she crown'd his 
forked brows, and woed him with his horn to 
rouse the skipping Satyrs, to hnnt a herd of swine 
that rooted up her corn : 

I ask'd her when she'd come, and in good sooth. 
She sent me packing, with anon-forsooth. 

Ven, I sent for Pan, and for Apollo too, what 
news from them? 

Cup, They said they would be here im- 
mediately. 

{En/er Pan and Apollo, ) 

Apo, Why in such haste hath Venus sent for 
us ? Ven, I sent for luno and for Ceres too, 
but the3r'll not come. 

Pan, Well, what's the news with you ? Ven, 
Have you not heard how Venus is contemn'd ? 
her temples gaz'd at, but not troad upon, her 
stately hangings, and her pillowes torn : 
Those rosie garlands that her statues crown'd 
Are wither'd, or else trampled on the ground. 
Those troops that flockM to Paphos to adore me. 
Shun Paphos now, and scornfully abhore me. 

Pan, That's strange, for all are up to th'ears in 
love, Boyes without beards get boyes, and Girles 
bear girles, fine little rattle-pates thus high, 
Dwaft wives ; If long this hot world stand, 
We shall have all the earth turn Pygmy-land. 

Ven, All honour Love, but none adore Loves 
Queen : 



LOVES MISTRI9. 2$ 

Apoi, The mjary is great, but ifo» wbettce 
springs it ? 

Ven, From Psiche daughter to the Arcadian^ 
King; 

They call her Queen of Love, will know no other, 
And swear my Son shall kneel and call her 
mother. 

Cup, But Cupid swears to make the jaeka 
forsworn. 

ApoL Will Citharea swallow this disgrace? 

Pan, What shall Pan do in this? V€9^ 

Lend me your aids, if you meet Psiche, charge 
young Mercury to send me to her, or imprison her 
till you have sent me word. ApoL If this be 
all, Venus shall have her wish. Pan, Pan by 
this upright horns and beard doth swear to hunt 
out Psiche ; but if I do this, what will sweet 
Venus give me ? Ven, A sweet kiss ; and 

Phebus shall have one, Cupid another, upon con- 
dition they will right those wrongs which Psiche 
in her great pride throws on me : draw from thy 
quiver a dull leaden shaft, and sticke it through 
her bosome to the heart. 

Make her in love, but let her proud eyes doat 
on some ill shapen drudge, some ugly fool, do this 
He weave for thee a Coronet of Roses, mixt with 
Berenices hair; and give thee my best Chariot, 
and my Doves, to hunt with on the earth, or in 
the air; wilt thou do this my boy? Cup, I 



24 



LOVES MISTRIS. 



will for-sooth. Ven, Nay do not mock me, 

wilt thou? Cup, Yes indeed, indeed I will 
for sooth. Ven, Sweet lad adieu then : 

Apolio^ Pan, revenge poor Venus wrongs, 
Whilst I unyoke my silver coloured team. 
To wanton on the bosome of yon stream. \Exit. 

Apol, Now she hath caird me down unto the 
earth, He try what pastimes dwell amongst the 
swains. [Exit, 

Pan, And with my Satires I will have some 
sport here in the Arcadian valleys. [Exit. 

Cup, Shall Psiches beautious eyes gaze on base 
love ? no, let my Mother storm, and chafe and 
lowre, she shall be none but Cupids Paramour : 

[Enter Zephirus, 

Ho Zephirus, how now thou puffing slave. 

Art thou grown proud, thou swell'st so ? Gentle 

winde, 
Clap on thy smoothest feathers, sleekest wings. 
And mount thee to the top of yonder rocke, there 
thou shalt finde anon a forlorn maid, convey her 
gently down unto the vail that borders on my 
bower : see this perform'd, and I will cloathe thee 
in a grass-green Robe, spotted with Dasies, Pincks, 
and Marigolds; Tie play the thief in Flora's 
treasury, to make all eyes in love with Zephirus ; 
Fly hence, do this, and henceforth be thou King 
Of all the Windes, and father of the Spring. 

[Exeunt, 



LOVES MISTS.IS. 2$ 

{Enter Admetus^ Menetius, ZeloHs^ Astioche, 
Petrea^ Psiche,) 

Ad, Behold the foot of that unhappy Rock, 
upon whose frozon top, by Phebus doom, thou 
must abide thy most sinister hap. 

Astio, Dear sister Psiche. 

Psi. Peace Astioche : Petrea, Father : you 
should all have mourn'd, when the mad spirits of 
the multitude kneel'd down, and call'd me Venus ; 
then have wept, when Cithereas Altars were left 
bare, and I was call'd a goddess; when these 
tears, whose reeking makes my Funeral lights 
burn dim, might have quench'd Venus wrath : 
but leave me now to fight with death, or meet 
worse misery. 

Mene, But lurks that serpent in that fatal rock ? 
Pet, So said Apollo. Zelo, Then Menetius, 

we will conduct fair Psiche to the cave, and rip 
the monsters entrails with our swords. 

PsL Forbear all force, I will ascend alone ; 
Phcebus will be displeas'd : Alone said he, dis- 
tressed Psiche shall climb up yon hill. Ad, The 
way is dangerous, thou wilt loose thy self without 
a guide. Psi, Death must my conduct be, see 
where the pale hagg stands ; vain world adieu, I 
am his bride, he waits for none of you. 

\She climbs up the Rock, 

Ad, What pains the poor Girl takes, see how 
she strives 






M air bither t have been bronghf, on ameen 
wings; What wondrous place is ihis? No ser- 
penl SDTe larks in Ihis pleasant bower : 1117 eai 
diinks sonnds of heaven- tun'tj Instruments ; I see 
to creature, anJ yet me thought soR fingers set 
me down, and I am forc'd by sweet cnmpatsion, 
to be the onely guest of -^ Biajua jSm fUn, tmd 
this feir board, which fmaaly ut nia viiik 
empty, is as soon new ell dilkata. 

liirDished ; I fain would touch these sweets, bat 
fear to taste them. Eccha. Tasle them. 2 Taste 
them. 3 Taste them. 

Fsi. What voice is that ? I dare no longer sit. 

Eaho. Sit. a Sit. 3 Sil. 

/W. Who mocks me? Are you devils, or are 
you gods ? 

Eccha. Gods. 2 Gods. 3 Gods. 

Ar. The gods will do DO harm . 

Ecche. No haiiii. 2 No harm. 3 No harm. 

Psi. Pachebe bold, andtasle this heavenly food. 

Eccko. Ha, ha, ha. 2 Ha, ha, ha. 3 Ha, 

fsi. These are no Ecchoes, for Ihey shift their 
place, nor catch they my last words as Ecchoes do ; 
for when I would have fed, they mock'd my 
pride, Ihey laught Hi rny presumption : No, ihey 
ate Fnry-Elves, and will torment me. 

(Enter Zrfhirus viilk drink.) 

thus I talk to them,— WTio fills this wine, and 



38 LOVES MISTRIS. 

tempts my eye with it ? as who should say, Drink 
Psiche. 

Eccho, Drink Psiche. 2 Drink Psiche. 3 
Drink Psiche. 

Psi. He taste no drop of this inchanted wine : 
ain from this Magick circle wonld I rise, yet dare 
not ; oh let Psiche see your eyes, or rid me hence, 
and set my fears in peace. 

Eccho, Peace. 2 Peace. 3 Peace. 
{Enter Luptd,) 

Cup, How lovely is my Psiche ! earth's too base 
To be possest of her Celestial Form : 
My mother hates her ; for the gods I fear 
Would banish her from earth, my Love being 

there ; 
And therefore shall she live in Cupids Bower, 
For she deserves to be Loves Paramour : 

how my fair eyes wound me ; by this kiss, and 

this white hand. 

Psi, Oh me ! what voice is this I feel ? beside 
soft fingers, and a Ring. Cup. Long white 

fingers, soft white hand, 
Ring and all at thy command. 

Psu Is this my husband then? Cup, IIo 
Zephirus, remove hence those Ambrosian dishes 
straight. {Zephirus takes off the Banquet, 

Psi, My father much mistook the Oracle ; 
To this sweet voice, could I enjoy the sight, 

1 should my self then stile Queen of Delight. 



LOVRS MISTRIS. 29 

Cup, Pleasure shall be thy Lackey ; wilt thou 
hunt, 
Then in an ayery Chariot, drawn by birds. 
On the windes downy back my Love shall ride ; 

Mild Zephirus shall be thy Waggoner ; who if 
the heat offend, his silver wings shall fan cool air 
upon thee, yet my Love, if thou commit'st one 
sin, thou art not mine. 

Psu Name it, and Tie avoid it for your sake. 

Cup, Thy mourning sisters shortly will return, 
and seek thee on the rock from whence thou cam'st, 
But shun their sight and speech ; Psiche do this. 
Thou rob'st me else of love, thy self of bliss. 

Psi, Not speak nor see my sisters ; oh what 
pleasure can Psiche take, lock't in a Golden Jayl ? 

Cup. Run not unto thy ruine gentle love ; 
Yet if thou needs wilt see and speak with them, 
Command thy servant Zephirus to bring them 
From top of yonder Rock into this vail ; 
But if they make inquiry who I am. 
Fill both their laps with gold, and send them gone, 
Besides I woe thee by this nuptial kiss, do not 

perswade me to disclose my shape, 
Attempting that, thou loosest this high state ; 
I then must leave thee, thou live desolate. 

Psu In all these things I will obey my love. 

Cup, Then Psiche, in thine unseen husbands 
hand, 



30 LOVES MISTRIS. 

Clasp thy white fingers ; I'le now crown thy bed 
With the sweet spoiles of thy lost Maiden-bead. 

{Enter ApuUius and Midas,) 

Aft, Hand off, let go my sheep hook, Fie not 
stay, 
I*k hang my self, e're I'le see out thy Play : 
Call you this Poetry ? Ap. If this displease thee 
Midas, then I'le shew thee e're I proceed with 
Cupid and his love, what kinde of people I com- 
merst withal in my transhape. 

Mi, That's when thou wert an Ass. Ap, 
The very same. 

Mi, Yes, that I fain would see. 

Ap, Sit then and view thine own infirmity. 
{A dance. Enter a proud ass with Ears, ) 

Mi, What fellow's that ? 

Ap, A self-willed insolent fool, who spights at 
those above him, and those beneath despiseth, 
and his equals jests* upon ; rich in his own conceit, 
in judgement poor, 

Still carping, tho* a coxcomb, and may pass, 
As these days go, for a proud arogant Ass. 
( Dance, Enter a Prodigal Ass, ) 

Mid, I, this I like ; What fellowes that ? 

Ad, A fellow he, who riots that, which most 
pemuriously his father hoorded, in drabs, drink 

•The text reads «jct8." 



LOVES MISTRIS. 3 1 

and play, wearing fantastick habits, and gay 
clothes. 

Till he hath quite exhausted all his gold, 
And for a prodigal Ass may be inroul'd. 
{Dance. Enter a Drunken Ass,) 

Mi, This gives me good content what's he ? 

Ap, A pot-companion, brother to the glass. 
That roars in's cups, indeed a drunken Ass. 

{Dance, Enter an Usurer,) 

Mi, He looks like a good fellow Now that 

gray beard ? 

Ap, One that doth pinch his belly in his life, 
and starve his own guts to make others feed ; 
Patcheth his own clothes to make others proud, 
And for a covetous Ass may be allow'd. 

{Dance, A young Gentlewoman, ) 

Mi, But so did never Midas — Now that Minks. 

Ap, Her mothers darling she, born to good 
means ; in love with all she sees, yet truly, none ; 
who then great Heires are proffered, trifles them ; 
And in the end, when with none else she can, 
She marries with her fathers Serving-man : 
And that is a right she- Ass.
