Canonical Title: LOVE'S PILGRIMAGE
Requested Title: LOVE'S PILGRIMAGE
Authors: Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: dramaticworksofb07beauiala
Item Title: The dramatic works of Beaumont and Fletcher;
Item Creator: Beaumont, Francis, 1584-1616
Item Year: 1778
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: LOVE'S PILGRIMAGE
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/dramaticworksofb07beauiala/dramaticworksofb07beauiala_djvu.txt
SCENE,  BARCELONA  and  the  Road. 


LOVE'S 


LOVE'S  PILGRIMAGE. 


ACT     I.        SCENE     I. 

Enter  Incubo  and  Diego. 

Intubo.  /^IGNOR  don  Diego,  and  mine  holt, 
^^k  fave  thee ! 

\^J    Diego.  I  thank  you,  mailer  Baily. 

Inc.  Oh,  the  block  ! 

Diego.  Why,  hosv  mould  I  have  anfwer'd  ? 

Inc.  Not  with  that 

Negligent  rudenefs ;  but,  *  I  kifs  your  hands, 
'  Signer  don  Incubo  de  Hambre ;'  and  then 
My  titles ;  '  mailer  Baily  of  Caftel-Blanco.' 
Thou  ne'er  wilt  have  the  elegancy  of  an  hoil ; 
I  forrow  for  thee,  as  my  friend  and  goflip  ! — 
No  fmoak,  nor  ileam  out-breathing  from  the  kitchen  ? 
There's  little  life  i'  th'  hearth  then. 

Diego.  Ay  ;  there,  there  ! 
That  is  his  friendmip,  hearkening  for  the  fpit, 
And  forry  that  he  cannot  fmell  the  pot  boil. 

Inc.  Strange 

An  inn  mould  be  fo  curs'd,  and  not  the  fign 
Blafted  nor  wither'd  j  very  ftrange  !  three  days  now, 
And  not  an  egg  eat  in  it,  nor  an  onion. 

Diego.  I  think  they  ha'  ftrew'd  th'  highways  with 

caltraps,  I ; 

No  horfe  dares  pafs  'em  ;  I  did  never  know, 
A  week  of  fo  fad  doings,  fmce  I  firft 
Stood  to  my  fign-poft. 

A  3  Inc. 


6         LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

Inc.  Goflip,  I  have  found 
The  root  of  all :  Kneel,  pray  -,  it  is  thyfelf 
Art  caufe  thereof  -t  each  perfon  is  the  founder 
Of  his  own  fortune,  good  or  bad :  But  mend  it  j 
Call  for  thy  cloak  and  rapier. 

Diego.  How  ! 

Inc.  Do,  call, 

And  put  'em  on  in  hade :  Alter  thy  fortune, 
By  appearing  worthy  of  her.     Dolt  thou  think 
Her  good  face  e'er  will  know  a  man  in  cuerfo  ? 
In  fingle  body,  thus  ?  in  hofe  and  doubier, 
The  horfe-boy's  garb  ?  bafe  blank,  and  half-blank 

citerfo  ? 

Did  I,  or  matter  dean  of  Sevil,  our  neighbour, 
E'er  reach  our  dignities  in  cuerpo,  think'ft  thou  ? 
In  fquirting  hofe  and  doublet  ?  Signer,  no  ; 
There  went  more  to't :  There  were  cloaks,  gowns, 

caflbcks, 

And  other  paramentos :  Call,  I  lay. 
His  cloak  and  rapier  here  ! 

Enter  Hoftefs. 

Hoftefs.  What  means  your  worfhip  ? 

Inc.  Bring  forth  thy  hulband's  fword.     So !  hang 

it  on. 

And  HOW  his  cloak  !  here,  caft  it  up.     I  mean, 
Goflip,  to  change  your  luck,  and  bring  you  guefts. 

Hoftefs.  Why,  is  there  charm  in  this  ? 

Inc.  Expect.     Now  walk  ; 
But  not  the  pace  of  one  that  runs  on  errands ! 
For  want  of  gravity  in  an  hoft  is  odious. 
You  may  remember,  goflip,  if  you  pleafe, 
(Your  wife  being  then  th'  infanta  of  the  gipfies, 
Andyourfelf  governing  a  great  man's  mules  then) 
Me  a  poor  'fquire  at  Madrid,  attending 
A  mafter  of  ceremonies  (but  a  man,  believe  ir, 
That  knew  his  place  to  the  gold-weight);  and  fuch. 
Have  I  heard  him  oft  fay,  ought  ev'ry  noft 
Within  the  Catholick  king's  dominions 

Be, 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.        7 

Be,  in  his  own  houfe. 

Diego.  How? 

Inc.  A  mafter  of  ceremonies  -, 
At  leaft,  vice-mafter,  and  to  do  nought  in  cuerf 9  -, 
That  was  his  maxim.     1  will  tell  thee  of  him : 
He  would  not  fpeak  with  an  ambaffador's  cook, 
See  a  cold  bake-meat  from  a  foreign  part, 
In  cuerpo :  Had  a  dog  but  ftay'd  without, 
Or  beail  of  quality,  as  an  Englim  cow, 
But  to  prefent  itfelf,  he  would  put  on 
His  Savoy  chain  about  his  neck,  the  ruff 
And  cuffs  of  Holland,  then  the  Naples  hat, 
With  the  Rome  hatband,  and  the  Florentine  agat, 
The  Milan  fword,  the  cloak  of  Genoa,  fet 
With  Flemifh  buttons  ;  all  his  griven  pieces, 
To  entertain  'em  in ;  and  compliment    {Knock  within. 
With  a  tame  cony,  as  with  the  prince  that  fent  it. 

Diego.  Lift  !   who  is  there  ? 

Inc.  A  guefl,  an't  be  thy  will ! 

Diego.  Look,  fpoufe ;  cry  '  luck,'  an  we  be  en- 
counter'd.     Ha  ? 

Hofcejs.  Luck  then,  and  good;  for  'tis  a  fine  brave 

guett, 
With  a  brave  horfe. 

Inc.  Why  now,  believe  of  cuerpo 
As  you  (hall  fee  occafion.     Go,  and  meet  him. 

Enter  Tbeodofia. 

Thecd.  Look  to  my  horfe,  I  pray  you,  well. 

Diego.  He  (hall,  Sir. 

Inc.  Oh,  how  beneath  his  rank  and  call  was  that  now ! 
Your  horie  fhall  be  entreated  as  becomes 
A  horfe  of  fafliion,  and  his  inches. 

Tbeod.  Oh! 

Inc.  Look  to  the  cavalier !  What  ails  he  ?  Stay ! 
If  it  concern  his  horfe,  let  it  not  trouble  him  ; 
He  (hail  have  all  refpedl  the  place  can  yield  him, 
Either  of  barley,  or  frefh  ftraw. 

Diego.  Good  Sir, 

A  4  Look 


S        LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE. 

Look  up. 

Inc.  He  finks !   Somewhat  to  caft  upon  him  -9 
He'll  go  away  in  cuerpo  elfe. 

Diego.  What,  wife ! 

Oh,  your  hot  waters  quickly,  and  fome  cold 
To  caft  in  his  fweet  face. 

Hoftefs.  Alas,  fair  flower  !  [ExiL 

Inc.  Does  any  body  entertain  his  horfe  ? 

Diego.  Yes  j  Lazaro  has  him. 

Enter  Hoftefs,  with  a  glafs  of  'Water. 
Inc.  Go  you  fee  him  in  perfon.  [Exit  Diego. 

Hoftefs.  Sir,  tafte  a  little  of  this ;  of  mine  own  water, 
I  did  diftill't  myfelf.     Sweet  lily,  look  upon  me; 
You  are  but  newly  blown,  my  pretty  tulip  ; 
Faint  not  upon  your  ftalk.     'Tis  firm,  and  frefli. 
Stand  up  :  So !  bolt  upright.     You're  yet  in  growing. 
I'beod.  Pray  you  let  me  have  a  chamber. 
Hoftefs.  That  you  mail,  Sir. 
fheod.  And  where  I  may  be  private,  I  entreat  you. 
Hoftefs.  For  that,  in  troth>  Sir,  we've  no  choice : 

Our  houfe 

Is  but  a  vent  of  need z,  that  now  and  then 
Receives  a  gueft  between  the  greater  towns, 

As  they  come  late  j  only  one  room 

Inc.  She  means,  Sir,  it  is  none 
Of  thofe  wild  fcatter'd  heaps  call'd  inns,  where  fcarcc 
The  holt's  heard,  tho'  he  wind  his  horn  t*  his  people ; 
Here  is  a  competent  pile,  wherein  the  man, 
Wife,  fervants,  all  do  live  within  the  whiftle. 

Hoftefs.  Only  one  room 

Inc.  A  pretty  modeft  quadrangle  f 
She  will  defcribe  to  you. 

Hoftefs.  (Wherein  ftand  two  beds,  Sir) 
We  have ;  and  where,  if  any  gueft  do  come, 
He  muft  of  force  be  lodg'd  ;  that  is  the  truth,  Sir- 

Enter  Diego. 
Theod.  But  if  I  pay  you  for  both  your  beds,  methinks, 

2  Venta.]  An  inn.     Hifyanice.  Theobald. 

That 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.         9 

That  fhould  alike  content  you. 

Hoftefs.  That  it  (hall,  Sir  : 
If  I  be  paid,  I'm  paid. 

Tbeod.  Why,  there's  a  ducat-, 
Will  that  make  your  content  ? 

Hoftefs.  Oh,  the  fweet  face  on  you  ! 
A  ducat  ?  yes  :  An  there  were  three  beds,  Sir, 
And  twice  fo  many  rooms,  which  is  one  more, 
You  fhould  be  private  in  them  all,  in  all,  Sir : 
No  one  mould  have  a  piece  of  a  bed  with  you  ; 
Not  mafter  dean  of  Sevil  himfelf,  I  fwear, 
Tho'  he  came  naked  hither,  as  once  he  did, 
When  h'  had  like  t' have  been  ta'ena-bed  with  theMoor, 
And  gelt  by'r  mafter ;  you  mail  be  as  private 
As  if  you  lay  in's  own  great  houfe  that's  haunted, 
Where  nobody  comes,  they  fay. 
Tbeod.  I  thank  you,  Hoftefs. 
Pray  you,  will  you  Ihew  me  in  ? 

Hoftefs.  Yes,  marry  will  I,  Sir ; 
And  pray  that  not  a  flea,  or  a  chinch J  vex  you. 

[Exeunt  Hoftefs  and  Tbeod. 

Inc.  You  forget  fupper  !  Goflip,  move  for  fupper. 
Diego.  'Tis  itrange  what  love  to  a  bcaft  may  do  !  his 

horfe 
Threw  him  into  this  fit. 

Inc.  You  (hall  excufe  me  ; 
It  was  his  being  in  cuerpo  merely  caus'd  it. 
Diego.  Do  you  think  fo,  Sir  ? 
Inc.  Moft  unlucky  cuerpo  I 

Nought  elfe.     He  looks  as  he  would  eat  partridge, 
This  gueft;  ha'  you  'em  ready  in  the  houfe  ? 
And  a  fine  piece  of  kid  now  ?  and  frelh  garlick, 

Enter  Hoftefs. 
With  a  fardina  and  Zant  oil 4  ? — How  now  ? 

5  Chinch."]  Stevens's  Spanifh  Dictionary  explains  chincbe  in  this 
manner :  '  An  infect  breeding  in  wood,  and  particularly  in  bed  Heads. 
'  We  call  them  bugs,  and  from  the  French  punaijei,  Latin  cimex, 
*  thence  corruptly  ibincbe.'  R. 

*  With  a  fardina  and  Zant  oil  f~]  A  fardina,  or  fafdiny,  is  an 
anchovy.  Sjmpfon 

Has 


io       LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGED 

Has  he  befpoke  ?   what,  will  he  have  a  brace, 
Or  but  one  partridge  ?  or  a  fhort-leg'd  hen, 
Daintily  carbonado'd  ? 

Hoftejs.  'Las,  the  dead 
May  be  as  ready  for  a  fupper  as  he. 

Inc.  Ha  ? 

Hoftejs.  H'  has  no  mind  to  eat,  more  than  his  madow< 

Inc.  Say  yon  ? 

Diego.  How  does  your  worfhip  ? 

Inc.  I  put  on 

My  left-fhoe  firft  to-day,  (now  I  perceive  it) 
And  fkipt  a  bead  in  faying  them  over,  elfe 
I  could  not  be  thus  crofs'd  !  He  cannot  be 
Above  feventeen  •,  one  of  his  years,  and  have 
No  better  a  ftomach  ? 

Hoftejs.  And  in  fuch  good  cloaths  too  ! 

Diego.  Nay,  thofe  do  often  make  the  ftomach  worfe^ 

wife  ; 
That  is  no  reafon. 

Inc.  I  could,  at  his  years,  goffips, 
(As  temperate  as  you  fee  me  now)  have  eaten 
My  brace  of  ducks,  with  my  half-gooie,  my  cony, 
And  drank  my  whole  twelve  marvedis  in  wine, 
As  eafy  as  I  now  get  down  three  olives. 

Diego.  And,  with  your  temperance-favour,  yet  I 

think 

Your  worfhip  would  put  to't  at  fix  and  thirty  J, 
For  a  good  wager  •,  and  the  meal  in  too. 

Inc:  I  do  not  know  what  mine  old  mouth  can  do ; 
I  have  not  prov'd  it  lately. 

Diego.  That's  the  grief,  Sir. 

Inc.  But  is  he,  without  hope  then,  gone  to-bed  ? 

Hoftejs.  I  fear  fo,  Sir  j  h'  has  lock'd  the  door  elofe 

to  him  : 
Sure  he  is  very  ill. 

y  Tour  tKorJhip  would  put  to^tathx.  and  thirty.}  Sym£>fon  fays,' 
'  This  is  not  an  age  tor  a  man  to  be  called  old  at  :  Six  and  fifty,  I 
4  imagine,  was  what  our  Authors  wrote.'  We  fee  no  realon  for  this 
variation  •,  thirty- fix  is  old  to  fevenftenv 

Ins* 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.       n 

Inc.  That  is  with  falling. 

You  fhould  ha'  told  him,  gofilp,  what  you  had  had, 
Given  him  the  inventory  of  your  kitchen  ; 
It  is  the  picklock  in  an  inn,  and  often 
Opensaclofe-barr'dftomach.  What  may  he  be,  trow? 
Has  he  fo  good  a  horfe  ? 

Diego.  Oh,  a  brave  jennet, 
As  e'er  your  wormip  law. 

Inc.  And  be  eats  ? 

Diego.  Strongly. 

Inc.  A  mighty  folecifm  !  Heav'n  give  me  patience  ! 
What  creatures  has  he  ? 

Hoftefs.  None. 

Inc.  And  fo  well  cloath'd, 
And  fo  well  mounted  ? 

Diego.  That's  all  my  wonder,  Sir, 
Who  he  mould  be  :  He  is  attir'd  and  hors'd 
For  the  conftable's  fon  of  Spain. 

Inc.  My  wonder's  more 

He  mould  want  appetite. — Well,  a  good  night 
To  both  my  goffips  !   I  will  for  this  time 
Put  off  the  thought  of  flipping.     In  the  morning, 
Remember  him  of  breakfail,  pray  you. 

Hoftefs.  I  mail,   Sir. 

Diego.  A  hungry  time,  Sir. 

Inc.  We  that  live  like  mice 
On  others'  meat,  muft  watch  when  we  can  get  it.  [Exit. 

Hoftefs.  Yes,  but  I  would  not  tell  him,  our  fair  gueft 
Says,  tho'  he  eat  no  fupper,  he  will  pay 
For  one. 

Diego.  Good  news !  we'll  eat  it,  fpoufe,  t'  his  health. 
'Twas  politickly  done  t'admit  no  fharers. 

Enter  Philippo. 

Phil.  Look  to  the  mules  there  !  Where's  mine  hoft  ? 
Diego.  Here,  Sir.— 
Another  fairy  ? 
Hoftefs.  Blefs  me ! 
Phil.  From  what,  fweet  Hoftefs  ? 

Arc 


i£       LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE, 

Are  you  afraid  o'  your  guefts  ? 

Hoftefs.  From  angels,  Sir; 
I  think  there's  none  but  fuch  come  here  to-night. 
My  houfe  had  never  Ib  good  luck  before, 
For  brave  fine  guefts  :  And  yet,  the  ill  luck  on't  is, 
I  cannot  bid  you  welcome. 

Phil.  No  ? 

Hoftefs.  Not  lodge  you,  Sin 

Phil.  Not,  Hoftefs? 

Hoftefs.  No,  in  troth,  Sir  ;  I  do  tell  you, 
Becaufe  you  may  provide  in  time  j  my  beds 
Are  both  ta'en  up  by  a  young  cavalier, 
That  will  and  muft  be  private. 

Diego.  He  has  paid,  Sir, 
For  all  our  chambers. 

Hoftefs.  Which  is  one  •,  and  beds, 
Which  I  already  ha'  told  you  are  two.     But,  Sir, 
So  fweet  a  creature — I  am  very  forry 
I  cannot  lodge  you  by  him  ;  you  look  fo  like  him  ! 
You're  both  the  lovelieft  pieces 

Phil.  What  train  has  he  ? 

Diego.  None  but  himfelf. 

Phil.  And  will  no  lefs  than  both  beds 
Serve  him  ? 

Hoftefs.  H'has  giv'n  me  a  ducat  for  'em. 

Phil.  Oh, 

You  give  me  reafon,  Hoftefs.     Is  he  handfome, 
And  young,  d'you  fay  ? 

Hoftefs.  Oh,  Sir,  the  delicat'ft  flelh, 
And  fineft  cloaths  withal,  and  fuch  a  horfe, 
Withfuchafaddle! 

Phil.  She's  in  love  with  all, 
The  horfe,  and  him,  and  faddle,  and  cloaths.     Good 

woman, 
Thou  juftifieft  thy  fex,  lov'ft  all  that's  brave. 

Enter  Incubo. 

Sure,  tho'  I  lie  o'th'  ground,  I'll  ftay  here  now, 
And  have  a  fight  of  him :  You'll  give  me  houfe-room, 

Fir*, 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.      i3 

Fire,  and  frefh  meat,  for  money,  gentle  Hoftefs, 
And  make  me  a  pallet  ? 

Inc.  Sir,  fhe  mall  do  reaion. — 
I  underftood  you  had  another  gueft,  gofllps  : 
Pray  you  let  his  mule  be  look'd-to,  have  good  ftravr, 
And  ftore  of  bran.    And,  goffip,  do  you  hear, 
Let  him  not  ilay  for  fupper :   What  good  fowl  ha* 

you  ? 
This  gentleman  would  eat  a  pheafant. 

Hofiefs.  'Las,  Sir, 
We  ha'  no  fuch. 

Inc.  I  kifs  your  hands,  fair  Sir. — 
What  ha'  you  then  ?  fpeak  what  you  have. — I'm  one, 

Sir, 

Here  for  the  Catholic  king,  an  officer   . 
T*  enquire  what  guefts  come  to  theie  places :  You,  Sir, 
Appear  a  perfon  of  quality,  and  'tis  fit 
You  be  accommodated. — Why  fpeak  you  not  ? 
What  ha*  you,  woman  ?  are  you  afraid  to  vent 
That  which  you  have  ? 

Phil.  This  is  a  mod  ftrange  man, 
T*  appoint  my  meat ! 

Hojlefs.  The  half  of  a  cold  hen,  Sir, 
And  a  boil'd  quarter  of  kid,  is  all  i'th'  houfe. 
Inf.  Why,  all's  but  cold.     Let  him  fee't  forth  5 

cover, 

And  give  the  eye  fome  fatisfaftion  : 
A  traveller's  ftomach  muft  fee  bread  and  fait  ; 
His  belly  is  nearer  to  him  than  his  kindred. — 
Cold  hen's  a  pretty  meat,  Sir. 

Phil.  What  you  pleafe. — 
I  am  refolv'd  t*  obey. 
Inc.  So  is  your  kid, 

With  pepper,  garlick,  and  the  juice  of  an  orange: 
She  fhall  with  fallads  help  it,  and  clean  linen. — 
Difpatch  !— rWhat  news  at  court,  Sir  ? 

Phil.  Faith,  new  tires 
Moil  of  the  ladies  have,  the  men  old  fuits  ; 
Only  the  king's  fool  has  a  new  coat 

To 


i4      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

To  ferve  you. 

Inc.  I  did  guefs  you  came  from  thence,  Sir, 

Phil.  But  I  do  know  I  did  not. 

Inc.  I  miftook,  Sir. 
kWhat  hear  you  of  the  archdukes  ? 

Phil.  Troth,  your  queilion. 

Enter  Hcftefs  and  Servants,  with  a  table. 

Inc.  Of  the  French  bufmefs  what  ? 

Phil.  As  much. 

Inc.  No  more  ? 
They  fay  the  French — Oh,  that's  well ;  come,  I'll  help 

you. 

Have  you  no  giblets  now  ?  or  a  broil'd  ralher  ? 
Or  fome  luch  prefent  difh  t'aflift  ? 

Hoftefs.  Not  any,  Sir. 

Inc.  The  more   your  fault!  you  ne'er  mould  be 

without 

Such  aids:  What  cottage  would  ha*  lack'da  pheafant 
At  fuch  a  time  as  this  ?  Well,  bring  your  her; 
And  kid  forth  quickly. 

Phil.  That  fhould  be  my  prayer, 
To  'fcape  his  inquifttion. 

Inc.  Sir,  the  French, 

They  fay,  are  divided  'bout  their  match  with  us  : 
What  think  you  of  it  ? 

Phil.  As  of  nought  to  me,  Sir. 

Inc.  Nay,  it's  as  little  to  me  too  •,  but  I  love 
To  afk  after  thefe  things,  to  know  th'  affections 
Of  ftates  and  princes,  now  and  then,  for  bettering — • 

Phil.  Of  your  own  ignorance. 

Inc.  Yes,  Sir. 

Phil.  Many  do  fo. 

Inc.  I  cannot  live  without  it.     What  d'  you  hear 
Pf  our  Indian  fleet  ?  they  fay,  they're  well  return'd. 

Phil.  I  had  no  venture  with  'em,  Sir  ;  had  you  ? 

Enter  Hoftejs  and  Servants^  with  meat. 
Inc.  Why  do  you  afk,  Sir  ? 

Phil 


LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE.       15 

Phil.  'Caufe  it  might  concern  you  j 
It  docs  not  me. 

Inc.  O\  here's  your  meat  come. 

Phil  Thanks! 
I  welcome  it  at  any  price. 

Inc.  Some  ftools  here  ! 

And  bid  mine  hoil  bring  wine. — I'll  try  your  kid, 
If  he  be  fweet :  He  looks  well.     Yes  j  he's  good. 
J'll  carve  you,  Sir. 

Phil.  You  ufe  me  too,  too  princely ; 
^afte,  and  carve  too  ! 

Inc.  I  love  to  do  thefe  offices. 

Phil.  I  think  you  do  ;  forwhofe  fake? 

Inc.  For  themlelves,  Sir-, 
The  very  doing  of  them  is  reward. 

Phil.  H'had  little  faith  would  not  believe  you,  §ir, 

Inc.  Gofiip,  fome  wine  ! 

Enter  Diegoy  with  wine. 

Diego.  Here  'tis,  and  right  St.  Martin. 

Inc.  Meafure  me  out  a  glafs. 

Phil.  I  love  the  humanity 
JJs'd  in  this  place. 

Inc.  Sir,  I  falute  you  here. 

Phil.  I  kifs  your  hands,  Sir. 

Inc.  Good  wine!  it  will  beget  an  appetite: 
Fill  him,  and  fit  down,  gofllp-,  entertain 
Your  noble  gueft  here,  as  becomes  your  title. 

Diego.  Pleafe  you  to  like  this  wine,  Sir  ? 

Phil.  I  diflike 

Nothing,  mine  hofl,  but  that  I  may  not  fee 
Your  conceal'd  gueft.     Here's  to  you ! 

Diego.  In  good  faith,  Sir, 
I  wifh  y'  as  well  as  him  ;  'would  you  might  fee  him  ! 

Inc.  And  wherefore  may  he  not  ? 

Diego.  H'  has  lock'd  himklf,  Sir, 
Up  i  and  has  hir'd  both  the  beds  o'  my  wife 
<At  extraordinary  rate. 

Phil.  I'll  give  as  much 

(if 


16      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

(If  that  will  do't)  for  one,  as  he  for  both  : 
What  fay  you,  mine  hoil  ?  The  door  once  open, 
I'll  fling  myfelf  upon  the  next  bed  to  him, 
And  there's  an  end  of  me  till  morning ;  noife 
I  will  make  none. 

Diego.  I  wifh  your  worfhip  well  -,  but 

Inc.  His  honour  is  engag'd  ;  and  my  me-gofllp 
Hath  pad  her  promife,  hath  me  not  ? 

Diego.  Yes,  truly. 

Inc.  That  toucheth  to  the  credit  of  the  houfe  : 
Well,  I  will  eat  a  little,  and  think.     How  fay  you,  Sir, 
Unto  this  brawn  o'  th'  hen  ? 

Phil.  I  ha'  more  mind 
To  get  this  bed,  Sir. 

Inc.  Say  you  fo  ?  why  then, 
Give't  me  again,  and  drink  to  me.     Mine  hod, 
Fill  him  his  wine  !  Thou'rt  dull,  and  doft  not  praife  it. 
I  eat  but  to  teach  you  the  way,  Sir. 

Phil.  Sir, 

Find  but  the  way  to  lodge  me  in  this  chamber, 
I'll  give  mine  hoil  two  ducats  for  his  bed, 
And  you,  Sir,  two  reals.     Here's  to  you  ! 

Inc.  Excufe  me ; 

I  am  not  mercenary.     Gofllp,  pledge  him  for  me. 
I'll  think.     A  little  more ;  butev'n  one  bit; 
And  then — Talk  on  j    you  cannot  interrupt  me. 

Diego.  This  piece  of  wine,  Sir,  coil  me 

he.  Stay  !  I've  found 

This  little  morfel,  and  then. — Here's  excellent  garlick  ! 
Have  you  not  a  bunch  of  grapes  now,  or  fome  bacon,. 
To  give  the  mouth  a  relilh  ? 

Diego.  Wife,  d'  you  hear  ? 

Inc.  It  is  no  matter.     Sir,  give  mine  hofl  your  ducats. 

Diego.  How,  Sir ! 

Inc.  Do  you  receive  'em  :  I  will  fave 
The  honefty  of  your  houfe  ;  and  yours  too,  goffip ; 
And  I  will  lodge  the  gentleman.     Shew  the  chamber, 

Diego.  Good  Sir,  d'  you  hear  ? 

Inc,  Shew  me  the  chamber. 

Diego. 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE,       17 

Diego.  Pray  you,  Sir, 
Do  not  dilturb  my  gueft  7; 

Inc.  Diilurb  ?  I  hope 

The  Catholick  king,  Sir,  may  command  a  lodging, 
Without  difturbing,  in  his  vaffkl's  houfe, 
For  any  minifter  of  his,  employ'd 
In  bufmefs  of  the  ftate.     Where  is  the  door  ?— 
Open  the  door  !   Who  are  you  there  ?   Within  ! 
In  the  king's  name  ! 

Theod.  [within.']  What  would  you  have  ? 
Inc.  Your  key,  Sir, 

And  your  door  open  :  I  have  here  command 
To  lodge  a  gentleman,  from  the  juftice,  fent 
Upon  the  king's  affairs. 

Theod.  Kings  and  neceflities 
Muft  be  obey'd  ;   The  key's  under  the  door* 

Inc.   How  now,  Sir  ?  are  you  fitted  ?  you  fecur'd  ? 
Phil.  Your  two  reals  are  grown  a  piece  of  eight. 
Inc.  Excufe  mej  Sir ! 
Phil.  'Twill  buy  a  hen,  and  wine, 
Sir,  for  tomorrow.  [Exit* 

Inc.  I  do  kifs  your  hands,  Sir.— 
Well,  this  will  bear  my  charge  yet  to  the  galUes, 
(Where  I  am  owing  a  ducat)  whither  this  night, 
By  the  moon's  leave,  I'll  march ;  for  in  che  morning 
Early,  they  put  from  Port  St>  Mary's. 

Diego.  Lazaro  !  [Exeunt  all  but  Diego* 

Enter  Lazaro. 

How  do  the  horfes  ? 

Laz.  'Would  you  would  go  and  fee,  Sir! 
A  plague  of  all  jades 8,  what  a  clap  h'  has  given  me  ' 

"  GueJIi.]  Former  editions. 

8  A  plague  of  all  jade s,  &c.]  The  fcene  now  coming  on  likewife 
Occurs  in  Jonfon's  comedy  of  the  New  Inn,  with  fcarce  any  variation 
in  the  fentiment,  though  a  good  deal  in  the  dialogue.  The  following 
is  Mr.  Whaliey'b  note  upon  this  fubjeft  : 

'  What  follows  in  this  fcene,  about  the  tricks  of  oitlcrs,  occurs 
'  likewife  in  the  firft  adl  of  Fletcher's  Love's  Pilgrimage  ;  and  p«r- 
•  haps  there  may  be  fome  difficulty  in  accounting  for  this  coincidence. 

VOL,  VII.  «  •  w. 


i3      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

As  fure  as  you  live,  matter,  he  knew  perfectly 
I  cozen'd  him  on's  oats  -,  he  look'd  upon  me, 
'  And  then  he  fneer'd,  as  who  Ihould  fay,  c  Take  heed, 

iirrah !' 

And  when  he  faw  our  half-peck,  which  you  know 
Was  but  an  old  court-dim,  Lord,  how  he  ftampt ! 
I  thought  't  had  been  for  joy-,  when  fuddenly 
He  cuts  me  a  back  caper  with  his  heels, 
And  takes  me  juft  o'  th'  crupper;  down  came  I, 
And  all  my  ounce  of  oats  :  Then  he  neigh'd  out, 
As  tho'  h'  had  had  a  mare  by  th'  tail. 

Diego.  Faith,  Lazaro, 

We  are  to  blame,  to  ufe  the  poor  dumb  fervitors 
So  cruelly. 

Laz.  Yonder's  this  other  gentleman's  horfe, 
Keeping  Our  Lady  eve  •,  the  devil  a  bit 
H'  has  got  fince  he  came  in  yet ;  there  he  (lands, 
And  looks,  and  looks — But  'tis  your  pleafure,  Sir, 
He  mail  look  lean  enough.     H'  has  hay  before  him, 
But  'tis  as  big  as  hemp,  and  will  as  foon  choak  him, 
Unlefs  he  eat  it  butter'd.     He  had  four  fhot-s, 
And  good  ones,  when  he  came ;  'tis  a  ftrange  wonder, 
With  Handing  ftill  he  mould  caft  three. 

•  We  are  told  that  fome  plays  of  Beaumont  and  Fletcher   being 

•  left  imperfect,  they  were  fitted  for  theftage  by  Shirley,  who  added 

•  what  he  thought  neceffary  to  complete  them  :  And  that  it  is  pro- 
4  bable  he  here  borrowed  from  our  Author's  New  Jnn,  what  pafles 

•  between  Lazaro  and  Diego  in   Love's  Pilgrimage:   And  thh  he 

•  thought,  perhaps,  m.ght  be  done  wuh  fafety  enough,  as  the  New 

•  Inn  met  with  ill  fucceis  in  the  reprefentation.     Could  we  certainly 
'  know  that  play  to  have  been  left  deficient  by  its  author,  1  fliould 
'  readily  admit  the  foiution  :  But  I  think  it  more  probable,  this  fcene 

•  was  originally  given  to  Fletcher  by  Jonfon  himfelf :  Fletcher  died 

•  in  1625,  and  the  New  Inn  was  not  brought  upon  the  ftage  till 

•  1629.     Our  Author,  therefore,  might  naturally  redemand  his  own 
'  property,  when  fo  fair  an  occafion  occurred  for  employing  it  him- 

•  felf :  Otherwife,  I  do  not  fee  how  we  can  account  for  part  of  this 
'  play's  appearing  long  before,  in  the  performance  of  another  author. 

•  h  will  not,  I  believe,  be  faid  that  Jonfon  was  the  borrower  ;  for 

•  the  whole  fcene  is  entirely  in  hit  manner  :  And  we  have  an  inllance 

•  in  our  Author's   Sejanus,  how  extremely  fcrupulous   he  was  in 

•  claiming  to  bimfelf  wkat  was  the  production  of  another  perfon.' 


LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE.       13 

Diego.  Oh,  Lazaro, 

The  devil's  in  this  trade!  Truth  never  knew  it ; 
And  to  the  devil  we  (hall- travel,  Lazaro, 
Unlefs  we  mend  our  manners.     Once  ev'ry  week 
I  meet  with  fuch  a  knock  to  mollify  me, 
Sometimes  a  dozen  to  awake  my  confcicnce, 
Yet  dill  I  deep  fecurely. 

Laz.  Certain,  mader^ 
We  mud  ufe  better  dealing. 

Diego.  'Faith,  for  mine  own  part, 
(Not  to  give  ill  example  to  our  iffues) 
I  could  be  well  content  to  deal  but  two  girths, 
And  now  and  then  a  faddle-cloth  ;  change  a  bridle, 
Only  for  excrcife. 

Laz.  If  we  could  (lay  there, 

There  were  feme  hope  on's,  mailer;  but  the  devil  is 
We're  drunk  ib  early,  we  millake  whole  faddles, 
Sometimes  a  horfe ;  and  then  it  feems  to  us  too 
Ev'ry  poor  jade  has  his  whole  peck,  and  tumbles 
Up  to  his  ears  in  clean  draw  ;  and  every  bottle 
Shews  at  the  lead  a  dozen  ;  when  the  truth  is,  Sir, 
There's  no  fuch  matter,  not  a  fmell  of  provender, 
Not  fo  much  draw  as  would  tie  up  a  hone-tail, 
Nor  any  thing  i'  th'  rack,  but  two  oldcobwebSj 
And  fo  much  rotten  hay  as  had  been  a  hen's  ned. 

Diego.  Well,thefe  midakings  mult  be  mended,Lazaro, 
Thefe  apparitions,  that  abuie  our  fenfes, 
And  make  us  ever  apt  to  fweep  the  manger, 
But  put  in  nothing ;  thele  fancies  mud  be  forgot^ 
And  we  mud  pray  it  may  be  reveal'd  to  us 
Whofe  horfe  we  ought,  in  conicience,  to  cozen, 
An.d  how,  and  when  :  A  parlon's  horfe  may  fuffer 
A  little  greafing  in  his  teeth,  'tis  wholefome, 
And  keeps  him  in  a  fober  muffle;  and  his  faddle 
May  want  a  dirrup,  and  it  may  be  fworn 
His  learning  lay  on  one  fide,  and  fo  broke  it : 
H'  has  ever  oats  in's  cloak-bag  to  prevent  us9, 

9  To  prevent  us. ]  Jonfon  in  his  New  Inn,  reads  what  may  be  the 
right  here,  to  affront  us.     The  corruption  was  eaf/.  Sjmf/on. 

B  2  And 


20      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

And  therefore  'tis  a  meritorious  office 
To  tithe  him  foundly. 

Laz.  And  a  grazier  may 

(For  thofe  are  pinching  puckfoifts  I0,  and  fufpicious) 
Suffer  a  mift  before  his  eyes  iometimes  too, 
And  think  he  fees  his  horfe  eat  half-a-bufhel ; 
When  the  truth  is,  rubbing  his  gums  with  fait, 
'Till  all  the  Ikin  come  off,  he  fhall  but  mumble 
Like  an  old  woman  that  were  chewing  biawn, 
And  drop  'em  out  again. 

Diego.  That  may  do  well  too, 
And  no  doubt  'tis  but  venial :  But,  good  Lazaro, 
Have  you  a  care  of  underftanding  horfes, 
Horfes  with  angry  heels,  gentlemens'  horfes, 
Horfes  that  know  the  world !  Let  them  have  meat 
'Till  their  teeth  ache,  and  rubbing  'till  their  ribs 
Shine  like  a  wench's  forehead  ;  they  are  devils 

Laz.  And  look  into  our  dealings.  As  fure  as  we  live, 
Thefe  courtiers'  horfes  are  a  kind  of  Welch  prophets; 
Nothing  can  be  hid  from  'em  :  For  mine  own  part, 
The  next  I  cozen  of  that  kind  mall  be  founder'd, 
And  of  all  four  too ;  I'll  no  more  fuch  compliments 
Upon  my  crupper. 

Diego.  Steal  but  a  little  longer, 
'Till  1  am  lam'd  too,  and  we'll  repent  together; 
It  will  not  be  above  two  days. 

Laz.  By  that  time 
I  mall  be  well  again,  and  all  forgot,  Sir. 

Diego.  Why  then,  I'll  ftay  for  thee.  [Exeunt. 

SCENE    II. 

'Theodofia  and  Philippo  difcovered  on  federal  beds. 
Theod.   Oh— ho!  oh— ho  ! 
Phil.  Ha! 

Tbeod.  Oh — oh  ! — Heart,  heart,  heart,  heart ! 
Phil.  What's  that  ? 
Tbeod.  When  wilt  thou  break,  break,  break,  break  ? 

10  Puckfoijls.~\  Fuckbatl,  or  puckfiji,  a  kind  of  mufhroom  full  of 
duft.  Joknfon. 

Phif. 


LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE.       21 

Phil.  Ha! 
I  would  the  voice  were  ftronger  ",  or  I  nearer. 

'J'beod.  Shame,  fhame,  eternal  fhame !  what  have  I 
done 

Phil.  Done? 

Tbeod.  And  to  no  end  !  what  a  wild  journey 
Have  I  more  wildly  undertaken  ! 

Phil.  Journey  ? 

Theod.  How,  without  counfel,  care,  reafon,  or  fear ! 

Phil.  Whither  will  this  fit  carry  ? 

Vbeod.  Oh,  my  folly  ! 

Phil.  This  is  no  common  ficknefs. 

Theod.  How  have  I  left 
All  I  fho-jld  love,  or  keep  !  Oh,  Heav'n  ! 

Phil.  Sir! 

fbeod.  Ha! 

Phil.  How  do  you,  gentle  Sir  ? 

Fheod.  Alas,  my  fortune  ! 

Phil.  It  feems  your  forrow  opprefTes :  Pleafe  your 

goodnefs, 

Let  me  bear  half,  Sir  j  a  divided  burthen 
Js  fo  made  lighter. 

Tbecd.  Oh  ! 

Phil.  That  figh  betrays 
The  fullnefs  of  your  grief. 

Tbeod.  Ay,  if  that  grief 
Had  not  bereft  me  of  my  underftanding, 
I  Ihould  have  well  remember'd  where  I  was, 
And  in  what  company ;  and  clapt  a  lock 
Upon  this  tongue  for  talking. 

Phil.  Worthy  Sir, 

Let  it  not  add  t'  your  grief,  that  I  have  heard 
A  figh  or  groan  come  from  you  ;  that  is  all,  Sir. 

<Tbeod.  Good  Sir,  no  more !  you've  heard  too  much, 

I  fear: 
'Would  I  had  taken  poppy  when  I  fpake  it ! 

Phil.  It  teems  you  have  an  ill  belief  of  me, 

11  Were  ftrong.]  1  imagine  we  fhou.d  read  here  for  improving  both 
paetre  and  fenfe  thus,  were  ftronger,  or  I  nearer.  Sympfon. 

R    ^  Anrl 


22    'LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

And  would  have  fear'd  much  more,  had  you  fpoke 

aught 

I  could  interpret.     But,  believe  it,  Sir, 
Had  I  had  means  to  look  into  your  breaft, 
And  ta'en  you  deeping  here,  that  fo  fecureiy 
I  might  have  read  all  that  your  woe  would  hide, 
I  would  not  have  betray'd  you. 

Tbeod.  Sir,  that  fpeech     . 
Is  very  noble,  and  almoft  woulcl  tempt 
My  need  to  truft  you. 

Phil.  At  your  own  election ; 
I  dare  not  make  my  faith  fo  much  fufpefted 
As  to  proteft  again ;  nor  am  I  curious 
To  know  more  than  is  fit. 

Theod.  Sir,  I  will  truft  you  ; 
But  you  fhall  prcmife,  Sir,  to  keep  your  bed, 
And,  whatfoe'er  you  hear,  not  to  importune 
More,  I  befeech  you,  from  me 

Phil.  Sir,  I  will  not. 

'Theod.  Then  I  am  prone  to  utter. 

Phil.  My  faith  for  it ! 

Tbeod.  If  I  were  wife,  I  yet  fhould  hold  my  peace. 
You  will  be  noble  ? 

Phil.  You  fhall  make  me  fo. 
If  you'll  but  think  me  fuch. 

Theod.  I  do.     Then  know 

'You  are  deceiv'd  with  whom  you've  talk'd  fo  long  : 
I  am  a  moft  unfortunate  loft  woman. 

Phil.  Ha ! 

fheod.  Do  not  ftir,  Sir  !  I  have  here  a  fword. 

Phil.  Not  I,  fweet  lady.  Of  what  blood  or  name  ? 

I'heod.  You'll  keep  your  faith  ? 

Phil.  I'll  perifh  elfe. 

fbeod.  Believe,  then, 

Of  birth  too  noble  for  me,  fo  defcended 

I  am  afham'd,  no  lefs  than  I'm  affrighted. 

Phil.  Fear  not :  By  all  good  things,  I  will  not 
wrong  you ! 

Fbeod.  I  am  the  daughter  of  a  noble  gentleman, 

Born 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.       23 

Born  in  this  part  of  Spain  ;  my  father's  name,  Sir — 
But  why  fhould  I  abufe  that  reverence, 
"When  a  child's  duty  has  rbrfaken  me  ? 

Phil.  Ail  may  be  mended,  in  fit  time  too :  Speak  it, 

'Theod.  Alphonfo,   Sir. 

Phil.  Alphonfo?  What's  your  own  name? 

I'heod.  Any  bafe  thing  you  can  invent. 

Phil.  Deal  truly. 

Tbeod.  They  call  me  Theodofia. 

Phil.  Ha  !  And  Love 
Is  that  hath  chang'd  you  thus  "  ? 

Theod.  You  have  obferv'd  me 
Too  nearly,  Sir ;  'tis  that  indeed ;  'tis  love,    Sir : 
And  love  of  him — oh,  Heav'ns,  why  fhould  men 

deal  thus  ? 

Why  fhould  they  ufe  their  arts  to  cozen  us 
That  have  no  cunning,  but  our  fears,  about  us  ; 
And  ever  that  too  late  tooi  no  difiembling 
Or  double  way,  but  doting,  too  much  loving  ? 
Why  fhould  they  find  new  oaths,  to  make  more 
wretches  ? 

Phil.  What  may  his  name  be  ? 

T'heod.  Sir,  a  name  that  promifes, 
Mcthinks,  no  fuch  ill  ufage  j  Marc-Antonio, 
A  noble  neighbour's  fon.     Now  I  muft  defire  you 
To  flay  a  while  -,  elfe  my  weak  eyes  muft  anfwer. 

Phil.  I  will. — Are  you  yet  ready  ?  W7hat's   his 
quality  ? 

Theod.  His  beft,  a  thief,  Sir ;  that  lie  would  be 

known  by 

Is,  heir  to  Leonardo,  a  rich  gentleman ; 
Next,  of  a  handfome  body,  had  Heav'n  made  him 
A  mind  fit  to  it.     To  this  man,  my  fortune 
(My  more  than  purblind  fortune)  gave  my  faith, 
Drawn  to  it  by  as  many  fhows  of  fervice 
And  figns  of  truth,  as  ever  falfe  tongue  utter'd : 
Heav'n  pardon  all ! 

Phil.  'Tis  well  faid !  Forward,  lady. 


Is  that  that  hatb  changed  you  thus? 
eod.  You've  obfervd  ne.~\  T he 


le&ion  of  the  former  edition?.' 
4 


24       LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

I'heod.  Contracted,  Sir,  and  by  exchange  of  rings 
Our  fouls  deliver'd  •,  nothing  left  unfinifh'd 
But  the  lad  work,  enjoying  me,  and  ceremony; 
For  that,  I  muft  confefs,  was  the  firft  wife  doubt 
I  ever  made.     Yet,  after  all  this  love,  Sir, 
All  this  profefllon  of  his  faith,  when  daily 
And  hourly  I  expected  the  blefs'd  prieft, 
He  left  me  like  a  dream,  as  all  this  ftory 
Had  never  been,  nor  thought  of;  why,  I  know  not} 
Yet  I  have  call'd  my  confcience  to  confeffion, 
And  every  fyllable  that  might  offend 
I've  had  in  fhrift :  Yet  neither  love's  law,  fignor^ 
Nor  tie  of  maiden's  duty,  but  defiring, 
Have  I  tranfgrefs'd  in.     Left  his  father  too ; 
Nor  whither  he  is  gone,  or  why  departed, 
Can  any  tongue  refolve  me.     All  my  hope 
(Which  keeps  me  yet  alive,  and  would  perfuade  me 
I  may  be  once  more  happy,  and  thus  lhapes  me 
A  fhame  to  all  my  modeft  fex)  is  this,  Sir  j 
I  have  a  brother,  and  his  old  companion, 
Student  in  Salamanca ;  there  my  laft  hope, 
If  he  be  yet  alive,  and  can  be  loving, 
Is  left  me  to  recover  him  :  For  which  travel, 
In  this  fuit  left  at  home  of  that  dear  brother's, 
Thus  as  you  find  me,  without  fear,  or  wifdom, 
I've  wander'd  from  my  father,  fled  my  friends, 
And  now  am  only  child  of  Hope  and  Danger. 
You  are  now  filent,  Sir  j  this  tedious  ftory 
(That  ever  keeps  me  waking)  makes  you  heavy : 
'Tis  fit  it  fhould  do  fo ;  for  that  and  I 
Can  be  but  troubles. 

Phil.  No  i  I  (leep  not,  lady  : 
I  would  I  could !  Oh,  Heav'n,  is  this  my  comfort  ? 

fheod.  What  ail  you,  gentle  Sir  ? 

Phil.  Oh! 

T.beod.  Wrhy  d'  you  groan  fo  ? 

Phil.  I  muft,  I  muft !  oh,  mifery ! 

I'heod.  But  now,  Sir, 

You  were  my  comfort :  If  any  thing  afflidl  you, 
Am  not  I  fit  to  bear  a  part  on't  ?  and  by  your  own  rule  ? 


LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE.        25 

Phil.  No ;  if  you  could  heal,  as  you  have  wounded 

me 

But  'tis  not  in  your  power. 

Theod.  I  tear  intemperance. 

Phil.  Nay,  do  noc  feek  to  fhun  me  !  I  muft  fee  you, 
By  Heav'n,  I  muft.  Hoa  there,  mine  hoft !  a  candle ! 
Strive  not ;  I  will  not  ftir  you. 

rheod.  Noble  Sir, 
This  is  a  breach  of  promife. 

Phil.  Tender  lady, 

It  fhall  be  none  but  neceflary.     Hoa  there ! 
Some  light  '*,  fome  light! 

Tbeod.  For  Heav'n's  fake !  Will  you  betray  me  ? 
Are  you  a  gentleman  ? 

Phil.  Good  woman 

Tbeod.  Sir! 

Enter  Diego,  with  a  light. 

Phil.  If  I  be  prejudicial  to  you,  curfe  roe! 

Diego.  You're  early  ilirring,  Sir. 

Phil.  Give  me  your  candle ; 
And  fo,  good-morrow  for  a  while. 

Diego.  Good-morrow,  Sir.  [Exit. 

Theod.  My  brother  don  Philippo?  Nay,  Sir,  kill  me! 
I  afk  no  mercy,  Sir,  for  none  dare  know  me  j 
I  can  deferve  none.     As  you  look  upon  me, 
Behold  in  infinite  thefe  foul  diihonours 
My  noble  father,  then  yourfelf,  laft  all 
That  bear  the  name  of  kindred,  fuffer  in  me ! 
I  have  forgot  whofe  child  I  am,  whofe  fifter  -, 
Do  you  forget  the  pity  tied  to  that, 
Let  not  compaflion  fv/ay  you  !  you  will  be  then 
As  foul  as  I,  and  bear  the  fame  brand  with  me, 
A  favourer  of  my  fault.     You  have  a  fword,  Sir, 
And  fuch  a  caufe  to  kill  me  in 

Phil.  Rife,  fifter! 
I  wear  no  fword  for  women,  nor  no  anger, 

11  Some  li^iit.  ,-i' me  !igbt    for  hJt'i.v'n's  fake. 

Iheod.  Wili  you,  &c  ]  So  all  the  former  editions;  but  it  feems 
very  unlikely  that  the  words  far  Heav'nsfake  fhould  be  fpoke  by 
Phil ppo  ;  we  have  given  them  to  Tkeodofia,  to  whofe  diftrefs  they 
are  perfectly  fuitabie. 

While 


16       LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

While  your  fair  chaftity  is  yet  untouch'd. 

I'heod.  By  thofe  bright  ftars,  it  is,  Sir. 

Phil.  For  my  fitter 

I  do  believe  you  j  and  fo  near  blood  has  made  us. 
With  the  dear  love  I  ever  bore  your  virtues. 
That  I  will  be  a  brother  to  your  griefs  too. 
Be  comforted :  'Tis  no  dishonour,  fitter, 
To  love,  nor  to  love  him  you  do ;  he  is  a  gentleman 
Of  as  fweet  hopes  as  years,  as  many  promifes 
As  there  be  growing  truths,  and  great  ones. 

Iheod.  Oh,  Sir ! 

Phil.  Do  not  deipair. 

^Checd.  Can  you  forgive  ? 

Phil.  Yes,  fitter, 
Tho'  this  be  no  fmall  error,  a  far  greater. 

fheod.  And  think  me  ftill  your  fitter  ? 

Phil.  My  dear  fitter. 

I'heod.  And  will  you  counfel  me  ? 

Phil.  To  your  own  peace  too  : 
You  {hall  love  ftill. 

.  I'heod.  How  good  you  are  !   • 

PHI.  My  bufmefs, 

And  duty  to  my  father,  which  now  drew  me 
From  Salamanca,  I  will  lay  afide, 
And  only  be  your  agent li.     To  perfuade  you 
To  leave  both  love,  and  him,  and  well  retire  you— 

Theod.  Oh,  gentle  brother ! 

Phil.  I  perceive  'tis  folly  : 
Delays  in  love,  more  dangerous  '* 

Tbeod.  Noble  brother ! 

Phil.  Fear  not,  I'll  run  your  own  way ;  and  to  help 
you, 

11  And  only  be  your  agent  to  ferfuade  ye 

To  leave,  &c.]  The  punduation  amended  by  a  friend  of  Mr. 
Sympfon. 

' J  Delays  in  love,  more  dangerous."]  More  dangerous  than  what  ? 
Here  is  nothing  feemingly  to  which  this  more  has  any  relation  :  I 
would  therefore  propofe  reading  thus, 

Delays  in  love  are  dangerous.  Sympfon. 

He  means  MORE  dangerous  than  perfuading  her  to  quit  her  lover. 
It  is  plain,  by  the  anfwer  and  reply,  {he  interrupts  him.  We  have 
therefore  made  it  a  broken  fpeech. 

(Love 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.        27 

(Love  having  rack'd  your  pafiions  beyond  counfel) 
I'll  hazard  mine  own  fame.  Whither  fhall  we  venture  ? 

Ibeod.  Alas,  I  know  not,  Sir. 

Phil.  Come,  'tis  bright  morning  ; 
Let's  walk  out^  and  confider.     You  will  keep  thig 
habit  ? 

tfheod.  I  would,  Sir. 

Phil.  Then  it  fhall  be  :  What  muft  I  call  you  ? 
Come,  do  not  biufh  j  pray  fpeak;  I  may  fpoil  all  elfe. 
Pray  call  me  Theodoro.  ) 


Enter  Diego. 

J)iego.  Are  you  ready  ? 
The  day  draws  on  apace.  Once  more,  good-morrow  \ 

Ibeod.  Good-morrow,  gentle  hoft.     Now  I  muft 
thank  you. 

Phil.  \V  ho  do/I  thou  think  this  is  ? 

Diego.  V\  ere  you  ft  wench,  Sir, 
I  think  you'd  know  before  me. 

1  III.  Mine  own  brother. 

Diego.  By  th'  mafs,  your  nofes  are  akin  !  Should 

I  then 
Have  been  fo  barbarous  to  have  parted  brothers  ? 

Phil.  You  knew  it  then  ? 

Diego.  I  knew  'twas  neceiTary 
You  fhould  be  both  together  :  Inftinct,  fignor, 
Is  a  great  matter  in  an  hoft. 

I'heod.  I'm  fatisfied. 

Enter  Pedro. 

Pedro.  Is  not  mine  hoft  up  yet  ? 
Phil.  Who's  that? 
Diego.  I'll  fee. 

Phil.  Sifter,  withdraw  yourfclf. 
Pedro.  Signor  Pliilippo  ! 
Phil.  Noble  don  Pedro  !  where  have  you  been  this 

way? 
Pedro.  I  carne  from  Port  St.  Maries,  whence  the 

gallies 
Put  this  laft  tide;  and  bound  for  Barcelona, 

I  brought 


28       LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

I  brought  Marc- Antony  upon  his  way. 

Phil.  Marc-Antony? 

Pedro.  Who  is  turn'd  foldier, 
'And  entertain'd  in  the  new  regiment 
For  Naples. 

Phil.  Is  it  poffible  ? 

Pedro.  I  allure  you. 

Phil.  And  put  they  in  at  Barcelona  ? 

Pedro.  So 
One  of  the  matters  told  me. 

Phil.  Which  way  go  you,  Sir? 

Pedro.  Home. 

Phil.  And  I  for  Sevil.  Pray  you,  Sir,  fay  not 
That  you  faw  me,  if  you  (hall  meet  the  queftion  j 
I  have  fome  little  bufmefs. 

Pedro.  Were  it  lefs,  Sir, 
It  mail  not  become  me  to  lofe  the  caution. 
Shall  we  breakfaft  together  ? 

Phil.  I'll  come  to  you,  Sir.  [Exit  Pedro. 

Sifter,  you  hear  this;  I  believe  your  fortune 
Begins  to  be  propitious  to  you.     We  will  hire 
Mules  of  mine  hoft  here;  if  we  can,  himfelf 
To  be  our  guide,  and  ftraight  to  Barcelona. 
This  was  as  happy  news  as  unexpected. 
Stay  you  'till  I  rid  him  away. 

Theod.  \  will.  [Exeunt. 


ACT     II.     SCENE    I. 

Enter  Alphonjo  and  a  Servant. 
Alph.  -TT  N  O  C  K  at  the  door. 

J^  Serv.  'Tis  open,  Sir. 
Alph.    i' hat's  all  one; 
Knock  when  I  bid  you. 

Serv.  Will  not  your  worfliip  enter? 
Alpb.  Will  not  yoy  learn  more  manners,  Sir,  and  do 
that 

Your 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.       29 
Your  mafier  bids  you ?  Knock,  you  knave,  or  I'll  knock 

Such  a  round  peal  about  your  pate 1  enter 

Under  his  roof,  or  come  to  lay  '  God  iave  you* 

To  him,  the  Ion  of  whofe  bafe  dealings  has  undone 

me  '*  ? 

(Knock  louder  !  louder  yet !)  I'll  ftarve  and  rot  firft} 
This  open  air  is  every  man's. 
2  Serv.  [within. ~\  Come  in,  Sir. 

Enter  Second  Servant. 

Alph.  No,  no,  Sir;  I'm  none  of  thefe  *  Come-in-Sirs,' 
None  of  thole  vifitants  :  Bid  your  wile  mafter 
Come  out-,  I  have  to  talk  unto  him  ;  go,  Sir  ! 

2  Serv.  Your  worfhip  may  be  welcome. 

Atyh.  Sir,  I  will  noc ; 

I  come  not  to  be  welcome.     Good  my  three  ducats, 
My  pickled  fprat  a-day,  and  no  oil  to  t, 
And  once  a-year  a  cotten  coat !  leave  prating, 
And  tell  your  mafter  I  am  here. 

2  Serv.  I  will,  Sir. — 
This  is  a  ftrange  old  man.  [Exit. 

Alph.  I  welcome  to  him  ? 
I'll  be  rirft  welcome  to  a  peft-houfe.     Sirrah, 
Let's  have  your  valour  now  cas'd  up,  and  quiet, 
When  an  occafion  calls  ;  'tis  wifdom  in  you, 
A  fervingman's  dilcretion  :  If  you  do  draw, 

Enter  Leonardo,  and  Sanchio  (carried  by  two  Servants 

in  a  chair). 

Draw  but  according  to  your  entertainment ; 
Five  nobles'  worth  of  fury. 

Leo.  Signer  Alphonfo, 
I  hope  no  difcontent  from  my  will  given, 

*+  The  fan  of  lubofe  bafe  dealings—]  The  oddnefs  of  the  phrafe, 
the  fan  of  bafe  dealings,  and  the  length  of  the  line,  make  me  mightily 
inclin'd  to  believe  the  original  might  have  been  expreffed  thus, 

To  him,  whofe  fon'j  bafe  dealings  has  undone  me.         Sympfon. 

Although  the  text  is  fomewhat  licentious,  it  is  probably  genuine, 
and,  >ve  think,  preferable  to  Svrrpfon's  variation. 

Has 


30      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

Has  made  you  fhun  my  houfe :  I  ever  lov'd  you  Iy  j 
And  credit  me,  amongfi;  my  fears  'tis  greateit 
To  miniiier  offences. 

Al-ph.  Oh,  good  fignor, 
I  I  now  you  tor  Iialian  breed,  fair-tongu'd  ! 
Spare  y--.nr  apologies  ;  I  care  not  for  'em  ; 
As  littie  r»-r  your  love,  Sir  :  I  can  live 
Without  y..>ur  knowledge,  eat  mine  own,  and  ileep 
Without  dependences,  or  hopes  upon  you. 
I  come  to  aik  my  daughter. 
"    Leo.  Genrie  Sir  ! 

Atyh.  1  am  not  gentle,  Sir;  nor  gentle  will  be, 
'Till  I  havejuitice,  my  poor  child  reitor'd 
Your  caper-cutting  boy  has  run  away  with, 
Young  ilgnor  Smooth-lace  ;  he  that  takes  up  wenches 
With  fmiies  ana  Ivveet  oehaviou'-s,  longs,  and  fonnets; 
Your  high-fed  jennet,  that  no  hedge  can  h.,ld  : 
They  lay  you  bred  him  for  a  ftaiiion 

Sane.  Fy,    fignor  !    there  be  times,  and  terms  of 

honour 

To  argue  thefe  things  in,  decidements  able 
To  fpeak  ye  noble  gentlemen,  ways  punctual, 
And  to  the  life  of  credit;  you're  too  rugged. 

Alph.  I  am  too  tame,  Sir. 

Leo.  Will  you  hear  but  reafon  ? 

Alph.  No,  I  will  hear  no  reafon  :  I  come  not  hither 
To  be  popt  off  with  reafon ;  reafon  then. 

Sane.  Why,  fignor,  in  all  things  there  muft  be 

method ; 

You  choke  the  child  of  Honour  elfe,  Difcretion. 
Do  you  conceive  an  injury  ? 

Atyh.  What  then,  Sir  ? 

Sam.  Then  follow  it  in  fair  terms ;  let  your  fword 

bite, 
When  time  calls,  not  your  tongue. 

Alph.  I  know,  Sir, 
Both  when  and  what  to  do,  without  directions, 

"s  lever  lov'dyou.]  Thefe  words  areoiil/  in  firit  folio,  from  which 
we  have  recovered  them. 

And 


LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE.      ji 

And  where,  and  how  •,  I  come  not  to  be  tutor'd  ; 
My  caufe  is  no  man's  but  mine  own.     You,  iignor  1 
Will  you  reftore  my  daughter  ? 

Leo.  Who  detains  her  ? 

Alpb.  No  more  of  thefe  (light  mifts  ! 

Leo.  You  urge  me,  fignor, 
Withftrange  injultice:  Becaufe  my  fon  has  err'd — — * 

Sane.  Mark  him. 

Leo.  Out  of  the  heat  of  youth,  does't  follow 
I  muft  be  father  ot  his  crimes  ? 

Alpb.   I  fay  Hill, 

Leave  off  your  rhet'rick,  and  reftore  my  daughter, 
And  fuddenly  -,  bring  in  your  rebel  too, 
Mountdragon,  he  that  mounts  without  commifllon, 
That  I  may  fee  him  punilh'd,  and  feverely  ; 
Or,  by  that  holy  Heav'n,  I'll  fire  your  houfe  ! 
And-there's  my  way  of  honour. 

Sane.  Pray  give  me  leave. 
Was  not  man  made  the  nobleft  creature  ? 

Alpb.  Well,  Sir? 

Sane.  Should  not   his    mind  then   anfwer  to   his 

making, 

And  to  his  mind  his  actions  ?  If  this  ought  to  be, 
Why  do  we  run  a  blind  way  from  our  worths, 
And  cancel  our  diicretions,  doing  thole  things 
To  cure  offences,  are  the  moft  offences  ? 
We've  rules  of  juftice  in  us  ;  to  thofe  rules 
Let  us  apply  our  angers :  You  can  confider 
Tiie  want  in  others  of  thefe  terminations, 
And  how  unfurnifh'd  they  appear. 

Alpb.  Hang  others ! 

And,  where  the  wrongs  are  open,  hang  refpe&s ! 
I  come  not  to  confider. 

Leo.  Noble  Sir,    . 

Let's  argue  coolly,  and  confider  like  men. 
Alpb.  Like  men  ? 
Leo.  You  are  too  fudden  ftill. 
Alpb.  Like  men,  Sir  ? 

Sane.  It  is  fair  language,  and  allied  to  honour. 

Alpb. 


32       LOVE/S     PILGRIMAGE. 

Alpb.   Why,  what  flrange  beaft  would  your  gravfc 

reverence 
MaVe  me  appear  ?   Like  men  ? 

Sane.    I  afte  but  that  point,  Sir, 
And  you  recover  all. 
Alpb.  I  tell  thy  wifdom 

I  am  as  much  a  man,  and  as  good  a  man 

Leo.  All  this  is  granted,  Sir. 

Alpb.  As  wife  a  man 

Sane.  You  are  not  tainted  that  way. 
Alpb.   Hnd  a  man 

Dares  make  thee  no  man  ;  or,  at  beft,  a  bafe  man. 
Sane    Fy,  fy  !   here  wants  much  carriage. 
Alpb.  Hang  much  carriage  ! 
Leo.  Give  me  good  language. 
Alpb.  Sirrah  iiynor,  give  me  my  daughter. 
Leo.  I  am  as  gentle  as  yourJeif,  as  free  born — »— 
Sane.  Obferve  his  way. 

Leo.  A-s  much  refpect  ow'd  to  me • 

Sane.  This  hangs  together  nobly. 
Leo.  And  for  civil, 

A  g<eat  deal  more,  it  feems.  Go  look  your  daughter ! 
Sane.  There  you  went  well  off,  fignor. 
Leo.  That  rough  tongue 

You  underftand  at  firft.     You  never  think,  Sir, 
Out  or  your  mightineis,  of  my  lofs ;  here  I  (land, 
A  patient  anvil  to  your  burning  angers, 
Made  fubject  to  your  dangers ;  yet  my  lofs  equal : 
Who  mail  bring  home  my  Ion  ? 
Alpb.  A  whipping  beadle. 
Leo.  Why,  is  your  daughter  whorifh  ? 

Alpb.  Ha,  thou  dar'ft  not 

By  Heav'n,  I  know  thou  dar'ft  not' 

Leo.  I  dare  more,  Sir, 
If  you  dare  be  uncivil. 

Alpb.  Laugh  too,  pigeon  ? 

Sane.  A  fitter  time,  for  Fame's  fake !  two  weak  nurfes 
Would  laugh  at  this.  Are  there  no  more  days  coming^ 
No  ground  but  this  to  argue  on  ?  No  fwords  left, 

Nor 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.      33 

Nor  friends  to  carry  this,  but  your  own  furies  ! 
Alas  !   it  mews  too  weakly. 

Atyh.  Let  it  mew  ! 

I  come  not  here  for  mows.     Laugh  at  me,  firrah  ? 
I'll  give  you  cauie  to  laugh. 

Leo.  You  are  as  like,  Sir. 
As  any  man  in  Spain. 

Alpb.  By  Heav'n,  I  will  j 
I  will,  brave  Leonardo  ! 

Leo.  Brave  Alphonfo, 
I  will  expedb  it  then. 

Sane.  Hold  ye  there  both  ! 
Thefe  terms  are  noble. 
L    Atyb.  You  mall  hear  mortly  from  me. 

Sane.  Now  difcreetly. 

Alph.  AfTure  yourfelf  you  mail.     Do  you  fee  this 

fword,  Sir  ? 
He  has  not  caft  his  teeth  yet. 

Sane.  Rarely  carried  ! 

Alpb.  He  bites  deep,  moft  times  mortal :  Signer, 
I'll  hound  him  at  thee ;  fair  and  home. 

Sane.  Still  nobly. 

Alpb.  And  at  all  thofe  that  dare  maintain  you, 

Sane.  Excellent ! 

Leo.  How  you  mail  pleafe,  Sir,  fo  it  be  fair ;  tho' 

certain 
I'd  rather  give  you  reafon. 

Sane.  Fairly  urg'd  too  ! 

Atyh.  This  is  no  age  for  reafon ;  prick  your  reafon 
Upon  your  fword's  point 

Sane.  Admirably  follow'd ! 

Alpb.  And  there  I'll  hear  it.   So,  'till  I  pleafe,  live, 
Sir.  [Exit. 

Leo.  And  fo,  farewell !  you're  welcome. 

Sane.  Th'  end  crown  all  things. 
Signor,  fome  little  bufmefs  paft,  thiscaufe  I'll  arguea 
And  be  a  peace  between  ye,  if 't  fo  pleafe  you, 
And  by  the  fquare  of  honour  to  the  utmoft. 
I  feel  the  old  man's  maiter'd  by  much  pamon, 

VOL.  VII.  C  And 


34       LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE, 

And  too  high  rack'd,  which  makes  him  overmoot  att 

Ills  valour  mould  direct  at,  and  hurt  thole 

That  ft?  -id  but  by  as  blenchers.  This  he  muft  know  too. 

As  necefiary  to  his  judgment;  doting  women 

Are  neither  fafe  nor  wife  adventurers,  conceive  me, 

If  once  their  wills  have  wander'd :  Nor  is't  then 

A  time  to  ufe  our  rages ;  for  why  mould  I 

Bite  at  the  ftone,  when  he  that  throws  it  wrongs  me  Z 

Do  not  we  know  that  women  are  moil  wooers, 

Tho*  clofeft  in  their  carnage  ?  Don't  all  men  know, 

Scarce  all  the  compafs  of  the  globe  can. hold  'em, 

If  their  affections  be  a-foot  ?  Shall  I  then  covet 

The  fellies  of  a  fhe-fool,  that  by  nature 

Muft  feek  her  like,  by  reafon  be  a  woman  t 

Sink  a  tall  mip,  becaufe  the  fails  defy  me? 

No,  I  difdain  that  folly;  he  that  ventures 

Whilft  they  are  fit  to  put  him  on,  has  found  out 

The  everlafting  motion  in  his  fcabbard16. 

I  doubt  not  to  make  peace.     And  fo,  for  this  time, 

My  beft  love  and  remembrance  \ 

Leo.  Your  poor  fervant !  [Exeunt- 

SCENE    IL 

Enter  Diego,  Philippo,  and  I'becslofia, 

PbiL  Where  will  our  horfes  meet  us  ? 

'Diego.  Fear  not  you,  Sir ; 

Some  half-mile  hence  my  worihip's  man  will  ftay  us. 
How  is  it  with  my  young  bloods  ?  Come,  be  jovial  j, 
Let's  travel  like  a  merry  flock  of  wild  geefe, 
Every  tongue  talking. 

Phil.  We  are  very  merry. 
But  do  you  know  this  way,  Sir? 

Tbeod.  Is't  not  dangerous  ? 
Methinks  thefe  woody  thickets  mould  harbour  knaves. 

Diego,  I  fear  none  but  fair  wenches ;  thofe  are  thieves 

16  He  that  ventures^  &c.  J  This  is  rather  obfcure ;  but  fignifiej, 

*  He  that  will  draw  his  fword  as  often  as  w^mena'  conduit  gives 

•  him  caufe,  will  never  let  it  reft  in  the  fcabbaid.' 

May 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.      35 

May  quickly  rob  me  of  my  good  conditions, 

If  they  cry  jland  once.     But  the  beft  is,  fignors, 

They  cannot  bind  my  hands ;  for  any  elfe, 

They  meet  an  equal  knave,  and  there's  my  pafiport. 

I've  feen  fine  fport  in  this  place  •>    had  thefe  trees 

tongues, 

They'd  tell  ye  pretty  matters:  Don't  you  fear  tho'; 
They  are  not  every  day's  delights. 

Pbil.  What  {port,  Sir  ? 

Diego.  Why,  to  fay  true,  the  fport  of  all  fports. 

Pbil.  Whatwas't? 

Diego.  Such  turning-up  of  taffetaes  !  and  you  know 
To  what  rare  whittling  tunes  they  go,  far  beyond 
A  fofc  wind  in  the  fhrouds  j  fuck  Jland  there, 
And  down  i'  th'  other  place !  fuch  fupplications 
And  fub-divifions  for  thofe  toys  their  honours  ! 
One,  '  As- you  are  a  gentleman,'  in  this  bum-, 
And1  Oh,  facet  Sir,  what  mean  you  ?  There's  a  bracelet, 

*  And  uie  me,  I  befeech  you,  like  a  woman!' 
And  her  petition's  heard  -t  another  fcratches, 

And  cries  fhe'll  die  firft,  and  then  fwoons;  but  certain 
She's  brought  to  life  again,  and  does  well  after. 
Another,  c  Save  mine  honour,  oh,  mine  honour ! 
c  My  hufband  ferves  the  duke,  Sir,  in  his  kitchen  -, 

*  I  have  a  cold  pie  for  you  -,  fy,  fy,  fy,  gentlemen ! 

*  Will  nothing  iatisfy  you?  \vhere's  my  hulband?' 
Another  cries,  '  D'ye  fee,  Sir,  how  they  ufe  me  ? 

4  Is  there  no  law  for  thefe  things  ?' 

fheod.  And,  good  mine  hoft, 
Do  you  call  thefe  fine  fports  ? 

Diego.  What  mould  I  call  'em  ? 
They've  been  fo  cali'd  thefe  thoufand  yearsand  upwards. 

Pbil.  But  what  becomes  o'  th'  men  ? 

Diego.  They're  ftript  and  bound, 
Like  fo  many  Adams,  with  fig-leaves  afore  'em, 
And  there's  their  innocence. 

'fbsod.  'Would  we  had  known  this, 
Before  we  reach'd  this  place  ! 

Pbil.  Come,  there's  no  danger ; 
Thefe  are  but  fcmetimes  chances. 

C  2  Enter 


36      LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE. 

Enter  Inculo  '7. 

Diego.  Now  we  mull  through. 
?beod.  Who's  that  ? 
Diego.  Stand  to  it,  fignors ! 
Phil.  No,  it  needs  not  v 
I  know  the  face,  'tis  honeft. 

Inc.  What,  mine  hoft, 
Mine  everlafting  hontft  hoft  ? 

Diego,  Mafs,  Baily  ? 
Now,  in  the  name  of  an  511  reckoning, 
What  make  you  walking  this  round  ? 

Inc.  A  pox  of  this  round, 

And  of  all  bnfmeis  too,  thro'  woods  !  and,  rafcals, 
They've  rounded  me  away  a  dozen  ducats, 
Befides  a  fair  round  cloak  :  Some  'of  'em  knew  me, 
Elfe  they  had  cas'd  me  like  a  cony  too, 
As  they  have  done  the  reft,  and  I  think  roafted  me, 
For  they  began  to  bafte  meibundly.  My  young  fignors7 
You  may  thank  Heav'n,  and  heartily,  and  hourly, 
You  fet  not  out  fo  early  •,  y'  had  been  fmoak'd  elie, 
By  this  true  hand  ye  had,  Sirs,  finely  fmoak'd  j 
Had  ye  been  women,  fmock'd  too. 
$becd.  Heav'n  defend  us ! 

Inc.  Nay,  that  had  been  no  prayer;  there  were  thofe 
That  run  that  prayer  out  of  breath,  yet  fail'd  too. 
There  was  a  friar,  now  you  talk  of  prayer, 
With  an  huge  bunch  of  beads,  like  a  rope  of  onions, 
(I'm  fure  as  big)  that,  out  of  fear  and  prayer, 
In  half-an-hour  wore  'em  as  fmall  as  bugles  ; 
Yet  he  was  flead  too. 

Phil.  At  what  hour  was  this  ? 
Inc.  Some  two  hours  fince. 
^heod.  D'  you  think  the  pafTage  fure  now  ? 
Inc.  Yes,  a  rope  take  'em  (as  it  will)  and  blefs  'em  ! 
They've  clone  for  this  day  fure. 
PbiL  Are  many  rifled  ? 

17  Enter  Bailiff".]  The  iutrnu  etiidoiis  make  ilrange confufion  with 
Incurs,  character,  calling  him  in  fome  fcenes  by  his  name,  and  in 
others  Bailiff,  as  if  they  were-  two  diitincc  characters.  This  error 
is  now  corrected. 

Inc. 


LOVE'S     PILGRIMAGE.       37 

Inc.   At  the  lead  a  dozen, 
And  there  left  bound. 

Theod.  How  came  you  free  ? 

Inc.  A  courtcfy 

They  ufe,  out  of  their  roguefhips,  to  bequeath 
To  one,  that,  when  they  give  a  fign  from  far, 
(Which  is  from  out  of  danger)  he  may  prdcntly 
Keleafe  the  reft :  As  I  met  you,  I  was  going, 
Having  the  fign  from  yonder  hill  to  do  it. 

I'beod.  Alas,  poor  men  ! 

Phil.  Mine  hoft,  pray  go  unty  'em. 

Diego.  Let  me  alone  for  cancelling !.  where  are  they  ? 

Inc.  In  every  bufli,  like  black-birds  ;   you  can't 
mils  'cm. 

Diego.  I  need  not  {talk  unto  'em.  [Exit. 

Inc.  No,  they'll  Hand  you, 

My  bufy  life  for  yours,  Sir.     You  would  wonder 
To  fee  the  feveral  tricks  and  ftrange  behaviours 
Of  the  poor  rafcals  in  their  miferies  : 
One  weeps,  another  laughs  at  him  for  weeping, 
A  third  is  monftrous  angry  he  can  laugh, 
And  cries,  '  Go  to  !  this  is  no  time-,'  he  laughs  ftill  •, 
A  fourth  exhorts  to  patience  ;  him  a  fifth  man 
Curfes  for  tamenefs  ;  him  a  friar  fchools  •, 
All  hoot  the  friar  ;  here  one  fings  a  ballad  ; 
And  there  a  little  curate  confutes  him  : 
And  in  this  linfey-woolfey  way,  that  would  make  a  dog 
Forget  his  dinner,  or  an  old  man  fire, 
They  rub  out  for  their  ranfoms.     Amongft  the  reft, 
There  is  a  little  boy  robb'd,  a  fine  child, 
It  feems  a  page  :  I  muft  confefs  my  pity 
(As  'tis  a  hard  thing  in  a  man  of  my  place 
To  mew  companion)  ftirr'd  at  him;  fo  finely, 
And  without  noife,  he  carries  his  afflictions, 
And  looks  as  if  he  had  but  dream'dof  lofing. 

ILntef  DiegOy  and  Leocadia  and  others  as  roWd. 
This  boy's  the  glory  of  this  robbery  •, 
The  reft  but  fhame  the  action.     Now  ye  may  hear  *em. 
I>fV£0.Come,hds,'tis  holy-day  j  hangcloaths ;  'tis  hot, 
C  3  And 


•  n  r 


38      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE, 

And  fweating  agues  are  abroad. 

i  Paflenger.  It  feems  fo  ; 
For  we  have  met  with  rare  phyficians 
To  cure  us  of  that  malady. 

Diego.  Fine  footing, 

Light  and  deliver ;  now,  my  boys  !   Matter  FrUr, 
How  does  your  holinefs  ?  Bear  up,  man  !  what, 
A  cup  of  neat  fack  now,  and  a  toaft  ?  ha,  Friar  ? 
A  warm  plaifter  to  your  belly,  father  ! 
There  were  a  blefiing  now ! 

Friar.  You  fay  your  mind,  Sir. 

Diego.  Where's  my  fine  boy,  my  pointer  ? 

Inc.  There's  the  wonder. 

Diego.  A  rank  whore  fcratch  their  fides  till  the  pox 

follow 

For  robbing  thee  !  thou  haft  a  thoufand  ways 
To  rob  thyfelf,  boy ;  dice,  and  a  chamber-devil. 

Leoc.  You  are  deceiv'd,  Sir. 

Diego.  And  thy  mailer  too,  boy. 

Phil.  A  fweet-fac'd  boy,  indeed  !   what  rogues  were 

thefe, 
What  barbarous,  brutifh  (laves,  to  ftrip  this  beauty  ? 

^theod.  Come  hither,  my  boy.     Alas  !  he's  cold  : 

Mine  hoft, 
We  muft  entreat  your  cloak. 

Diego.  Can  you  entreat  it  ? 

Phil.    We  do  prefume  ib   much ;   you've  other 
garments. 

Diego.  Will  you  entreat  thofe  too  ? 

"Theod.  Your  mule  muft  too 
To  the  next  town  •,  you  fay  'tis  near :  In  pity, 
You  cannot  fee  this  poor  boy  perim  ;  I  know 
You  have  a  better  foul.     We'll  fatisfy  you. 

Diego.  'Tis  a  ftrange  foolifh  trick  I  have,  but  I  can't 

help  it ; 

I'm  ever  cozen'd  with  mine  own  commendations  ; 
It  is  determin'd  then  I  mall  be  robb'd  too, 
To  make  up  vantage  to  this  dozen.     Here,  Sir  j 
Heav'n  has  provided  you  a  fimple  garment 

To 


LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE.      39 

To  fet  you  off;  pray  keep  it  handfomer 

Than  you  kept  your  own,  and  let  me  have  it  render'd, 

Brufh'd  and  difcreetly  folded. 

Leoc.  I  thank  you,  Sir. 

Diego.  Who  wants  a  doublet  ? 

iPaf.  I. 

Diego.  Where  will  you  have  it  ? 

2  Faff.  From  you,  Sir,  if  you  pleafe. 

Diego.  Oh,  there's  the  point,  Sir. 

Phil.  My  honell  friends,  I'm  forry  for  your  fortunes; 
But  that's  but  poor  relief :  Here  are  ten  ducats ; 
And  to  your  diitribution,  holy  Sir, 
I  render  'em,  and  let  it  be  your  care 
To  fee  'em,  as  your  wants  are,  well  divided. 

Diego.  Plain  dealing  now,  my  friends;  and,  father 

Friar, 

Set  me  thefaddle  right !  no  wringing,  Friar, 
Nor  tithing  to  the  church  !  thefe  are  no  duties ; 
Scour  me  your  confcience !  if  the  devil  tempt  you, 
Off  with  your  cord,  and  fwinge  him  t 

Friar.  You  fay  well,  Sir. 

All.  H«av'n  keep  your  goodnefs  ! 

Theod.  Peace  keep  you  !  Farewell,  friends  ! 

Diego.  Farewell,  light-horfe-men  !   \_Exe.  tbe  robbed. 

Phil.  Which  way  travel  you,  Sir? 

Inc.  To  the  next  town. 

Tbeod.  Do  you  want  any  thing? 

Inc.  Only  difcretion  to  travel  at  good  hours, 
And  fome  warm  meat  to  moderate  this  matter; 
For  I  am  moft  outrageous,  cruel  hungry. 

J)iego.  I  have  a  ftomach  too,  fuch  as  it  is,    " 
Would  pofe  a  right  good  pafty ;  I  thank  Heav'n'for't. 

Inc.  Cheefe,  that  would  break  the  teeth  of  a  new 

handfaw, 
I  could  endure  now  like  an  oftrich  Iy ;  or  fait  beef, 

>7  Chttfe 

1  could  eudure  now ]  What  my  hoft  means  is  plain  and  eafy, 

viz.  That  he  could  digeft  cheefe  which  would  break  an  handfaw's 
teeth,  his  ftomach  being  as  ftrong  as  that  of  an  oftrich.  But  I  believe 
no  dictionary  of  our  language  will  furnifh  us  with  fuch  a  fenfe  of  the 
word  endure.  I  have  therefore  ttken  the  liberty  to  fubflitute  what  I 
C  4  really 


40      LOVE'S    PILGRIMAGE. 

That  Caefar  left  in  pickle. 

Phil.  Take  no  care  •, 
We'll  have  meat  for  you,  and  enough.     P  th'  mean 

time, 

Keep  you  the  horfe-way,  left  the  fellow  mifs  us ; 
We'll  meet  you  at  the  end  o'  th'  wood. 

Diego.  Make  hade  then.  \_Exe.  Diego  and  Inc.
