Canonical Title: THE LOYAL SUBJECT
Requested Title: THE LOYAL SUBJECT
Authors: John Fletcher
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: loyalsubjecttrag00beau
Item Title: The loyal subject : a tragi-comedy
Item Creator: Beaumont, Francis, 1584-1616 ; Fletcher, John, 1579-1625, author ; Barton, Thomas Pennant, 1803-1869, former owner
Item Year: 1717
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE LOYAL SUBJECT
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/loyalsubjecttrag00beau/loyalsubjecttrag00beau_djvu.txt
Put.  He  has  rais’d  a young  Man, 


7 


the  Loyal  Subject. 

They  fay  a flight  young  Man,  I know  him  not, 

For  what  Defert  ? The.  Believe  it,  a brave  Gentleman, 

Worthy  the  Duke’s  refpc61,  a clear  fweet  Gentleman, 

And  of  a noble  Soul:  Come  let’s  retire  us, 

And  wait  upon  my  Father,  who  within  this  hour 
You  will  find  an  alter’d  Man.  Put . I am  forry  for’t,  Sir.  [Ex 


SCENE  II. 


Enter  Olympia,  and  two  Gentlewomen. 

Olym.  Is’t  not  a handfome  Wench? 

2 TVom . She  is  well  enough,  Madam: 

I have  fecn  a better  Face  and  a ftraighter  Body  j 
And  vet  fhe  is  a pretty  Gentlewoman. 

Olym.  What  think’ll  thou,  Petefcal 
Pet.  Alas,  Madam,  1 have  no  skill,  fhe  has  a black  Eye* 
Which  is  of  the  lead:  too,  and  the  dulled  Water: 

And  when  her  Mouth  was  made,  for  certain,  Madam, 
Nature  intended  her  a right  good  Stomach. 

Olym.  She  has  a good  Hand. 

2 Worn.  ’Tis  good  enough  to  hold  fall, 

And  flrong  enough  to  ftrangle  the  Neck  of  a Lute. 

Olym.  What  think  ye  of  her  Colour? 

Pet.  If  it  be  her  own 

’Tis  good  black  Blood  : Right  Weather-proof 
I warrant  it.  z TVom . What  a flrange  Pace  fhe  has  got? 
Olym.  That’s  but  her  Breeding. 

Pet.  And  what  a manly  Body?  methinks  fhe  looks 
As  though  fhe  wou’d  pitch  the  Bar,  or  go  to  Buffets. 

x TVom.  Yet  her  Behaviour’s  utterly  againfl  it, 

For  methinks  fhe  is  too  bafhful.  Olym . Is  that  hurtful? 

2 TVom.  Even  equal  to  too  bold  : Either  of  ’em,  Madam, 
May  do  her  Injury  when  time  fhall  ferve  her. 

Olym . You difeourfe  learnedly  *,  call  in  the  Wench. 


What  envious  Fools  are  you?  Is  the  Rule  general, 
That  Women  can  fpeak  handfomely  of  none. 

But  thofe  they  are  bred  withal? 

Pet.  Scarce  well  of  thofe,  Madam, 

If  they  believe  they  may  outfhine  ’em  any  way: 
Our  Natures  are  like  Oyl,  compound  us  with  any 
Yet  flill  we  flrive  to  fwim  o’  th’  top  : 

Suppofe  there  were  here  now, 

Now  in  this  Court  of  Mofco , a Stranger  Princefs, 
Of  Blood  and  Beauty  equal  to  your  Excellence, 

As  many  Eyes  and  Services  ftuck  on  hery 


[Exit  Gent 0 


thing, 


What 


A 


8 The  Loyal  SubjeB. 

What  wou'd  you  think? 

Olym.  I wou’d  think  flue  might  deferve  it. 

Pet.  Y our  Grace  fhall  give  me  leave  not  to  believe  ye  * 

I know  you  are  a Woman,  and  fo  humour’d  : 

I’ll  tell  ye,  Madam,  I cou’d  then  get  more  Gowns  on  ye. 

More  Caps  and  Feathers,  more  Scarfs,  and  more  Silk-ftockings 
With  rocking  you  afleep  with  nightly  Railings 
Upon  that  Woman,  than  if  I had  nine  Lives 
I cou’d  wear  out.  By  this  Hand  ye  would  fcratch  her  Eyes  out. 
Olym.  Thou  art  deceiv’d,  Fool*  now  let  your  own  Eye  mock  ye. 
Enter  Gentlewoman^  and  Alinda. 

Come  hither  Girl : Hang  me  and  fhe  be  not  a handfome  one. 

Pet . I fear  it  will  prove  indeed  fo. 

Olym . Did  you  ever  ferve  yet 
In  any  place  of  Worth  ? Alin.  No,  Royal  Lady. 

Pet . Hold  up  your  Head*  fie. 

Olym . Let  her  alone,  (land  from  her. 

Alin.  It  fliall  be  now, 

Of  all  the  Bleffings  my  poor  Youth  has  pray’d  for, 

The  greateft  and  the  happieft  to  ferve  you* 

And  might  my  Promife  carry  but  that  Credit 
To  be  believ’d,  bccaufe  I am  yet  a Stranger, 

Excellent  Lady,  when  1 fall  from  Duty, 

From  all  the  Service  that  my  Life  can  lend  me, 

May  everlalting  Mifery  then  find  me. 

Olym.  What  think  ye  now?  I do  believe,  and  thank  ye* 

And  fure  I fhall  not  be  fo  far  forgetful, 

To  fee  that  honeft  Faith  die  unrewarded: 

What  mult  I call  your  Name?  Alin.  Alinda^  Madam. 

Olym.  Can  ye  ling? 

Alin . A little,  when  my  Grief  will  give  me  leave,  Lady. 

Olym.  W hat  Grief  cantt  thou  have.  Wench? 

Thou  art  not  in  Love? 

Alin.  If  I be  Madam,  ’tis  only  with  your  Goodnefs  * 

For  yet  I never  faw  that  Man  I fighed  for. 

Olym.  Of  what  Years  are  you? 

Alin.  My  Mother  oft  has  told  me, 

That  very  Day  and  Hour  this  Land  was  blcffc 
With  your  molt  happy  Birth,  1 firlt  fainted 
This  World’s  fair  Light.  Nature  was  then  fo  bufie, 

And  all  the  Graces  to  adorn  your  Goodnefs* 
i Hole  into  the  World  poor  and  neglected. 

Olym . Something  there  was,  when  I firfl  lookt  upon  thee, 
Made  me  both  like  and  love  thee:  now  I know  it* 

And  you  fhall  find  that  knowledge  fhall  not  hurt  you  : 

I hope  ye  are  a Maid?  Alin.  I hope  fo  too.  Madam* 


I 


9 


The  Loyal  SubjeSf. 

I am  fure  for  any  Man,  And  were  I otherwifc,' 

Of  all  the  Services  my  Hopes  could  point  at, 

I durft  not  touch  at  yours. 

Flourifh.  Enter  Duke , Burris,  and  Gentlemen'. 

Pet.  The  great  Duke,  Madam.  Duke . Good  morrow*  Sifter* 

Glym.  A good  Day  to  your  Hignnefs. 

Duke.  I am  come  to  pray  you  ufe  no  more  Perfuaficns 
For  this  old  ftubborn  Man:  Nay  to  command  ye; 

His  Sail  is  (well'd  too  full:  He  is  grown  too  infolent, 

Too  fclf-affc&ed,  proud:  Thofc  poor  (light  Services 
He  has  done  my  Father,  and  my  felf,  have  blown  him 
To  fuch  a Pitch,  he  flycs  to  (loop  our  Favours. 

Olym.  hm  forry,  Sir:  I ever  thought  thole  Services 
Both  Great  and  Noble.  Bur.  However,  may  it  pleafe  ye 
But  to  confider  ’em  a true  heart’s  Servants, 

Done  out  of  Faith  to  f rve  you,  and  not  felf -fame. 

Do  but  confider,  Royal  Sir,  the  Dangers, 

When  you  have  (lept  fecure,  the  Mid-night  Tempefts, 

That,  as  he  marcht,  fung  through  his  aged  Locks; 

When  you  have  fed  at  full,  the  Wants  and  Famines ; 

The  Fires  of  Heav’n,  when  you  have  found  all  temperate, 

Death  with  his  thoufand  Doors Duke . I have  confider’d; 

No  more;  And  that  l will  have,  (hill  be.  Olym.  For  the  beft# 
I hope  all  ftill.  Duke  What  handfome  Wench  is  that  there? 

Olym.  My  Servant,  Sir.  Duke,  Prethee  obferve  her  Burris , x 
Is  lhe  not  wondrous  handfom  ? fpeak  thy  Freedom. 

Bur.  She  appears  no  Ids  to  me.  Sir.  Duke.  OF  whence  is  (lie? 
Olym.  Her  Father  I am  told  is  a good  Gentleman, 

But  far  off  dwelling;  Her  defire  to  lerve  me 
Brought  her  to  th’  Court,  and  here  her  Friends  have  left  her, 
Duke.  She  may  find  better  Friends:  Ye  are  welcome,  fair  one, 

I have  not  feen  a (wee ter  : By  your  Lady’s  leave  : 

Nay  (land  up,  Sweet;  we’ll  have  no  Superftition : 

You  have  got  a Servant;  you  may  ufe  him  kindly, 

And  he  may  honour  ye; 

Good  Morrow,  Sifter.  [Exe.  Duke , and  Burris. 

Glym.  Good  Morrow  to  your  Grace.  How  the  Wench  biufhes? 
How  like  an  Angel  now  (he  looks?  i Worn  At  firft  Jump, 
jump  into  the  Duke’s  Arms  ? We  muft  look  to  you, 

Indeed  we  tnuft,  the  next  jump  we  are  Journeymen. 

Pet.  I fee  the  Ruin  of  our  Hopes  already; 

Wou’d  (lie  were  at  home  again,  milking  her  Father’s  Cows, 
i IVm.  I fear  {he’ll  milk  all  the  great  Courtiers  firft, 

Olym . This  has  not  made  ye  proud?  Alin.  No  certain,  Madam. 
Olym.  It  was  the  Duke  that  ki'ft  ye.  Alin.  ’Twas  your  Brother, 
And  therefore  nothing  can  be  meant  but  Honour . 

B 


Olym 


j o "The  Loyal  StiljeSf. 

Olym.  But  fay  he  love  ye?  Alin.  That  he  may  with  fafety: 

A Prince’s  Love  extends  to  all  his  Subje&s. 

Olym.  But  fay  in  more  particular?  Alin.  Pray  fear  not: 

Tor  Virtues  fake  deliver  me  from  Doubts,  Lacy. 

’Tis  not  the  name  of  King,  nor  all  his  Promifes, 

His  Glories,  and  his  Grcatnefs,  (luck  about  me, 

Can  make  me  prove  a Traitor  to  your  Service, 

You  are  my  Mi  ft  refs,  and  my  noble  Matter, 

Your  Virtues  my  Ambition,  and  your  Favour 
The  end  of  all  my  Love,  and  all  my  Fortune: 

And  when  I fail  in  that  Faith- Olym.  I believe  thee, 

Coir.c  wipe  your  Eyes 5 I do:  Take  you  Example- 

Pet.  I wou’d  her  Eyes  were  out. 
i the  Wind  ffand  in  this  Door, 

We  fhall  have  but  cold  Cuftom:  Some  trick  or  other, 

And  speedily.  Pet.  Let  me  alone  to  think  on’t. 

Olym.  Come,  be  you  near  me  ltill.  Alin . With  all  my  Duty. 

[Exeunt, 


SCENE  HI. 


Enter  Arch  a?,  Theodore,  Putskie,  Ancient , and  Soldiers,  carryingJm 

Armour  piece-meal,  his  Colours  'wound  up,  and  his  Drums  in  Cafes . 

The.  This  is  the  heaviefl  March  we  e’er  trod,  Captain. 

Put.  This  was  not  wont  to  be:  Thefc  honour’d  Pieces 
The  fiery  God  of  W ar  himfclf  would  fmile  at, 

Buckl’d  upon  that  Body,  were  not  wont  thus. 

Like  Relicks  to  be  offer’d  to  long  Ruff, 

And  heavy-cy’d  Oblivion  brood  upon  ’em. 

Arch.  There  fet  ’em  down.*  And  glorious  War  farewell 
Thou  Child  of  Honour  and  ambitious  Thoughts, 

Begot  in  Blood,  and  nurs’d  with  Kingdoms  Ruins > 

Thou  golden  Danger,  courted  by  thy  Followers 

Through  Fires  and  Famines,  for  one  Title  from  thee»»-» 

Prodigal  Mankind  fpending  all  his  Fortunes  > 

A long  Farewcl  I give  thee.  Noble  Arms, 

You  Ribs  for  mighty  Minds,  you  Iron  Hcufes, 

Made  to  defle  the  1 huiukr-claps  of  Fortune, 

Ruft  and  confuming  Time  muft  now  dwell  with  ye: 

And  thou  good  Sword  that  kncw’ff  the  way  to  Conqueft, 

Upon  whofe  fatal  Edge  Defpair  and  Death  dwelt, 

That  when  I fhook  thee  thus,  fore-fhew’d  Deflru&ion, 

Sleep  now  from  Blood,  and  grace  my  Monument. 

Farewell  my  Eagle  * when  thou  flcw’ft,  whole  Armies 
Have  ftoopt  below  thee:  At  Paffagc  I have  feen.thee, 

Ruffle  the  Tartars,  as  they  fled  thy  Fury  y 


I 


lie  Loyal  SubjeB. 

And  bang  ’em  up  together,  as  a Taflel, 

Upon  the  ftretch,  a Flock  of  fearful  Pigeons, 

1 yet  remember  when  the  Volga  curl’d, 

The  aged  Volga  ^ when  he  heav’d  his  Head  up. 

And  rais’d  his  Waters  high,  to  fee  the  Ruins, 

The  Ruins  our  Swords  made,  the  bloody  Ruins, 

Then  flew  this  Bird  of  Honour  bravely,  Gentlemen. 

But  thefe  mull  be  forgotten:  So  mud  thefe  too, 

And  all  that  tend  to  Arms,  by  me  for  ever. 

Take  ’em  you  holy  Men  5 my  Vow  take  with  ’em. 

Never  to  wear  ’em  more:  Trophies  l give  ’em, 

Andfacred  Rites  of  War  to  adorn  the  Temple: 

There  let  ’em  hang,  to  tell  the  World  their  Mafter 
Is  now  Devotion’s  Soldier,  fit  for  Pray’r. 

Why  do  ye  hang  your  Heads?  Why  look  you  fad,  Friends? 

1 am  not  dying  yet.  The.  Ye  arc  indeed  to  us,  Sir. 

Put.  Dead  to  our  Fortunes,  General.  Arch.  You’ll  find  abetter,. 
A greater  and  a ftronger  Man  to  lead  ye, 

And  to  a ftronger  Fortune.  I am  old.  Friends, 

Time  and  the  V/ars  together  make  me  ftoop,  Gentlemen, 

Stoop  to  my  Grave:  My  Mind  unfurnifn’d  too. 

Empty  and  weak  as  I am : My  poor  Body, 

Able  for  nothing  now  but  Contemplation, 

And  that  will  be  a task  too  to  a Soldier: 

Yet  had  they  but  encourag’d  me,  or  thought  well 
Of  what  I have  done,  I think  I iliould  have  ventur’d 
For  one  knock  more,  l fiiould  have  made  a fhift  yet 
To  have  broke  one  ltaff  more  handibmely,  and  have  died 
Like  a good  Fellow,  and  an  honeft  Soldier, 

In  the  head  of  ye  all,  with  my  Sword  in  my  Hand, 

And  fo  have  made  an  end  of  all  with  Credit. 

The . Well,  there  will  come  an  hour,  when  all  thefe  Injuries, 

Thelc  fecure  Slights Arch.  Ha!  No  more  of  that  Sirrah, 

Not  one  word  more  of  that,  I charge  ye.  The.  Imuft  fpeak,  Sir. 
And  may  that  Tongue  forget  to  found  your  Service, 

That’s  dumb  to  your  Abufes.  Arch.  Umderftand,  Fool, 

That  voluntary  I fit  down.  The.  You  are  forc’d,  S r. 

Forc’d  for  your  Safety:  1 too  well  remember 
The  Time  and  Caufe,  and  1 may  live  to  curfe  ’em: 

You  made  this  Vow,  and  whole  Unnohleneft, 

Indeed  forgetfulncfs  of  good — Arch.  No  more. 

As  thou  art  mine,  no  more.  The.  Whofe  Doubt  and  Envies  ~—» 
But  the  Devil  will  have  his  due. 

Put.  Good  gentle  Colonel. 

The.  And  though  Difgraces,  and  contempt  of  Honour 
Reign  now,  the  Wheel  inuft:  turn  again. 

B z Arch 


t % the  Loyal  Subject. 

Arch.  Peace,  Sirrah, 

Your  Tongue’s  too  faucy.-  Do  you  ftare  upon  me? 

Down  with  that  Heart,  down  fuddcnly,  down  with  ity 
Down  with  that  Difbbcdience  j tie  that.  Tongue  up. 

The.  Tongue? 

Arch.  Do  not  provoke  me  to  forget  my  Vow,  Sirrah, 

And  draw  that  fatal  Sword  again  in  Anger. 

Pet . For  Heav’ns  fake,  Colonel.  Arch.  Do  not  let  me  doubt 
Whole  Son  thou  art,  bccaufe  thou  canft  not  fuffer : 

Do  not  play  with  mine  Anger  $ if  thou  doft, 

By  all  the  Loyalty  my  Heart  holds- 

the.  J have  done,  Sir, 

Pray  pardon  me.  Arch.  I pray  be  worthy  of  it. 

Befhrew  your  Heart,  you  have  vext  me.  The.  I am  forry,  Sir. 

Arch.  Go  to,  no  more  of  this : Be  true  and  honeft, 

I know  ye  are  Man  enough,  mould  icj  to  juft  Ends, 

And  let  not  my  Difgraces.  then  lam  miferable, 

When  I have  nothing  left  me  but  thy  Angers; 

Ficiirijh.  Enter  Duke , Burris,  Boroskie,  Attend . and  Cent. 

Put.  And’t  pleafe  ye,  Sir,  the  Duke. 

Duke.  Now,  what’s  all  this? 

The  meaning  of  this  ceremonious  Emblem? 

Arch.  Your  Grace  fhou’d  fir  ft  remember 

Bor.  There’s  his  Nature. 

Duke.  I do,  and  ftiall  remember  ftili  that  Injury, 

That  at  the  Mufter,  where  it  pleas’d  your  Greatnefs 
To  laugh  at  my  poor  Soldierfhip,  to  fcorn  it  $ 

And  more  to  make  me  leem  ridiculous, 

Took  from  my  Hands  my  Charge.  Bur . O think  not  fo,  Sir. 

Duke.  And  in  my  Father’s  fight.  Arch.  Heav’nbe  my  Witnefs. 
I did  no  more,  (and  that  with  Modefty, 

With  Love  and  Faith  to  you)  than  was  my  Warrant, 

And  from  your  Father  feal’d,  nor  durft  that  Rudenefs, 

And  Impudence  of  Scorn  fall  from  my  ’haviour  j 
I ever  yet  knew  Duty.  Duke.  We  fhail  teach  yc> 

I well  remember  too,  upon  fome  Words  I told  ye,,  ; 

Then  at  that  time,  fome  angry  Words  ye  anfwer’d*  . 

If  ever  I were  Duke,  you  were  no  Soldier. 

You  have  kept  your  word,  and  fo  it  (hall  be  to  you,  - 
From  henceforth  I difmifsyouj  take  your  eafe,  Sir. 

Arch.  I humbly  thank  your  Grace  j this  wafted  Body, 

Beaten  and  bruis’d  with  Arms,  dry’d  up  with  Troubles, 

Is  good  for  nothing  elfe  but  Quiet  now,  Sir, 

And  holy  Pray’rs*  in  which,  when  I forget  * 

To  thank  Heav’n  for  all  your  bounteous  Favours, 

May  that  be  Deaf,  and  my  Petitions  perifh. 


7 he  Loyal  Subject.  i I 

Bor.  What  a fmooth  humble  Cloak  he  has  cas’d  his  Pride  in? 
And  how  he  has  pull’d  his  Claws  in?  There’s  no  mailing 

Bur.  Speak  for  the  bed  Bor  Believe  I (hall  do  for  ever. 

Duke . To  make  ye  underdand,  we  feel  not  yet 
Such  Dearth  of  Valour,  and  Experience, 

Such  a declining  Age  of  doing  Spirits, 

That  all  fhould  be  confin’d  within  your  Excellence, 

And  you,  or  none  be  honour’d  : Take,  Boroskie , 

The  place  he  has  commanded,  lead  the  Soldier 3 
A little  time  will  bring  thee  to  his  Honour,  tj 

Which  has  been  nothing  but  the  World’s  Opinion, 

The  Soldiers  Fondnefs,  and  a little  Fortune, 

Which  I believe  his  Sword  had  the  lead  {hare  in. 

The . O that  I durft  but  anfwer  now.  Put . Good  Colonel 

The.  My  Heart  will  break  elfe.  Royal  Sir,  I know  not 
What  you  edeem  Mens  Lives,  whofe  hourly  Labours* 

And  lols  of  Blood,  Confumptions  in  your  Service, 

Whofe  Bodies  are  acquainted  with  more  Miferies, 

And  all  to  keep  you  fafe,  than  Dogs  or  Slaves  are. 

His  Sword  the  lead  fhare  gain’d? 

Duke,  You  will  not  fight  with  me?  The.  No  Sir,  1 dare  not* 
You  are  my  Prince,  but  \ dare  fpeak  to  ye, 

And  dare  fpeak  Truth,  which  none  of  their  Ambitions 
That  be  Informers  to  you,  dare  once  think  of 3 
Yet  T ruth  will  now  but  anger  ye  j I am  forry  for’r. 

And  fo  I take  my  leave.  [Exit. 

Duke.  Ev’n  when  you  pleafe,  Sir. 

Arch.  Sirrah,  fee  me  no  more.  Duke.  And  fo  may  you  too: 

You  have  a Houfe  i’th’  Country,  keep  you  there,  Sir, 

And  when  you  have  rul’d  your  felf,  teach  your  Son  Manners* 

For  this  time  I forgive  him.  Arch.  Heav’n  forgive  all ^ 

And  to  your  Grace  a happy  and  long  Rule  here. 

And  you,  Lord  General,  may  your  Fights  be  profperous.  6 

In  all  your  Courfe  may  Fame  and  Fortune  court  you. 

Fight  for  your  Country,  and  your  Prince’s  Safety  3 
Boldly,  and  bravely  face  your  Enemy, 

And  when  you  ftrike,  ftrike  with  that  killing  Virtue* 

As  if  a general  Plague  had  feiz’d  before  ye  3 
And  then  come  home  an  old  and  noble  Story. 

Bur.  A little  Comfort,  Sir.  Duke.  As  little  as  may  be : 

Farewel,  you  know  your  Limit.  [Ex.  Duke , S&r- 

Bur.  Alas,  brave  Gentleman. 

Arch . I do,  and  will  obferve  it  fuddenly. 

My  Grave  > ay,  that’s  my  Limit  \ ’tis  no  new  thing, 

Nor  can  that  make  me  dart,  or  tremble  at  it, 

To  buckle  with  that  old  grim  Soldier  now : 


14  ' the  Loyal  StsljcU. 

I have  feen  him  in  his  fowreft  fliapes,  and  dreadfuirftj 
Ay,  and  I thank  my  Honefty,  have  ftood  him: 

That  Audit’s  cad}  farewel  my  honed  Soldiers, 

Give  me  your  Hands  $ farewel,  farewel  good  Ancient , 

A (lout  Man,  and  a true,  thou  art  come  in  Sorrow. 

Blefiings  upon  your  Swords,  may  they  ne’er  fail  yc  j 
You  do  but  change  a Man  j your  Fortune’s  conftant  \ 

That  by  your  ancient  Valours  is  ty’d  fad  dill} 

Be  valiant  dill,  and  good : And  when  ye  fight  next, 

When  Flame  and  Fury  make  but  one  Face  of  Horror, 

When  the  great  red  of  all  your  Honour’s  up, 

When  you  wou’d  think  a Spell  to  (hake  the  Enemy, 

Remember  me,  my  Prayers  ihall  be  with  ye : 

So  once  again  farewel.  Put.  Let’s  wait  upon  ye. 

Arch.  No,  no,  it  mud  not  be  5 I have  now  left  me 
A (ingle  Fortune  to  my  felf,  no  more, 

Which  needs  no  Train,  nor  Compliment}  good  Captain, 

'You  are  an  honed  and  a fober  Gentleman, 

And  one  I think  has  lov’d  me.  Put.  I am  fure  on’t. 

Arch.  Look  to  my  Boy,  he’s  grown  too  henddrong  for  me. 

And  if  they  think  him  fit  to  carry  Arms  dill, 

His  Life  is  theirs}  I have  a Houk  i’th*  Country, 

And  when  your  better  hours  will  give  you  Liberty, 

See  me:  You  fliall  be  welcome.  Fortune  to  ye.  [Evit> 

Anc . I’ll  cry  no  more,  that  will  do  him  no  good. 

And  ’twill  but  make  me  dry,  and  I have  no  Mony. 

I’ll  fight  no  more,  and  that  will  do  them  harm  * 

And  if  T can  do  that,  1 care  not  for  Mony. 

1 cou’d  have  curd  rcafonable  well,  and  I have  had  the  luck  too 
To  have  ’em  (it  fometirrres.  Whofoevcr  thou  arr, 

That  like  a Devil  didd  po fiefs  the  Duke 
With  thefe  malicious  Thoughts}  mark  what  I fay  to  thee, 

A Plague  upon  thee,  that’s  but  the  Preamble. 

Sol.  O take  the  Pox  too.  Anc.  They’ll  cure  one  another* 

J mud  have  none  but  kills,  and  thofe  kill  dinking. 

Or  look  ye,  let  the  fingle  Pox  pofiefs  them, 

Or  Pox  upon  Pox.  Put.  That’s  but  ill  i’  th’  Arms,  Sir. 

Anc . ’Tis  worfc  i’  th  Leg?,  I wou’d  not  wifh  it  elfe: 

And  may  thole  grow  to  Scabs  as  big  as  Mole-hills,  . 

And  t ''Vice  a Day,  the  Devil  with  a Curricomb 
Scratch  ’em,  and  ferub  ’em;  I warrant  him  he  has  ’em. 

&?/.~May  be  be  ever  Lowzy.  Anc.  That’s  a Plealure, 

The  Beggar’s  Lechery-,  fometimes  the  Soldier’s: 

May  he  be  ever  lazy,  dink  where  he  (lands, 

And  Maggots. breed  in’s  Brains.  2 Sol.  Ay,  marry  Sir, 

May  he  fail  mad  in  Love  with  his  Grand* mother, 


And 


The  Loyal  SutjccL.  y j 

And  killing  her,  may  her  Teeth  drop  into  his  Mouth, 

And  one  fall  crofs  his  Throat,  then  let  him  gargle. 

Enter  a Poft. 

Put.  Now  what’s  the  matter? 

Poft.  Where’s  the  Duke,  pray  Gentlemen  ? 

Put.  Keep  on  your  way,  you  cannot  mifs. 

Poft.  I thank  yc.  [Exit* 

Ar.c.  If  he  be  married,  may  he  dream  he’s  Cuckol’d, 

And  when  he  wakes  believe,  and  fwcar  he  faw  it. 

Sue  a Divorce,  and  after  find  her  honeft: 

Then  in  a pleafant  Pigfty,  with  his  own  Garters, 

And  a fine  running  knot,  ride  to  the  Devil. 

Put.  If  thefe  wou’d  do 

Anc . I’ll  never  truft  my  Mind  more, 

If  all  thefe  fail,  i SoJ.  What  fhail  we  do  now,  Captain? 

For  by  this  honeft  Hand  I’ll  be  torn  in  pieces, 

Unlcfs  my  old  General  go,  or  fome  that  love  him. 

And  love  us  equal  too,  before  I fight  more. 

I can  make  a Shoo  yet,  and  draw  it  on  too, 

If  I like  the  Leg  well.  Anc.  Fight?  ’Tis  likely! 

there  will  be  the  Sport  Boys,  when  there’s  need  on’f. 

They  think  the  other  Crown  will  do,  will  carry  us. 

And  the  brave  golden  Coat  of  Captain  Cankro 
Boroskie . What  a noife  his  very  Name  carries? 

’Tis  Gun  enough  to  fright  a Nation, 

He  needs  no  Soldiers*  if  he  do,  for  my  part, 

I promife  yc  he’s  like  to  feek  ’em  * fo  ] think  you  think  toor 
And  all  the  Army*  No,  honeft,  brave  old  Arcba 
We  cannot  fo  foon  leave  thy  Memory, 

So  foon  forget  thy  Goodncfc : He  that  docs, 

The  fcandal  and  the  feum  of  Arms  be  counted. 

Put.  You  much  rejoycc  me  now  you  have  hit  my  meanings 
I durft  not  prefs  yc  till  I found  your  Spirits: 

Continue  thus.  Anc . I’ll  go  and  tell  the  Duke  on’t. 

Enter  fee  end  Poft. 

Put . No,  no,  he’ll  find  it  foon  enough,  and  fear  it* 

When  once  occafion  comes.  Another  Packet! 

From  whence,  Friend,  come  you? 
z Peft.  From  the  Borders,  Sir. 

Put.  What  news,  Sir,  I befeech  you? 

2 Poft.  Fire  and  Sword*  Gentlemen* 

The  Tartar's  up,  and  with  a mighty  force 

Comes  forward,  like  a Tcmpeft,  all  before  him 

Burning  and  killing.  Anc.  Brave  Boys,  brave  News,  Boys. 

2 Poft.  Either  we  muft  haveprefent  help Anc.  Still  bravest 

Poft.  Where  lies  the  Duke  ?•  SoL  He  s there. 


5 6 Tie  Loyal  SuljtB. 

2 Pojl.  ’Save  ye  Gentlemen.  [Exit. 

Anc.  We  are  lafe  enough,  I warrant  thee. 

Now  the  time’s  come. 

Put.  Ay,  now  ’tis  come  indeed,  and  now  ftand  firm,  Boys, 

And  let  ’em  burn  on  merrily. 

Anc.  This  • ity  would  make  a fine  marvellous  Bonefirc: 
fTis  old  dry  Timber,  and  fuch  Wood  has  no  Fellow.  4 4 
z Sol.  Here  will  be  mm  piping  anon  and  whining, 

I . ike  fo  many  Pigs  in  a Storm, 

When  they  hear  the  news  once. 

Enter  Boroskie,  and  a Servant. 

Put . Here’s  one  has  heard  it  already  $ 

Room  for  the  General.  f l 

Bor.  Say  I am  fall’n  exceeding  fick  o’  th’  fudden, 

And  am  not  like  to  live.  Put.  if  ye  go  on,  Sir, 

For* they  will  kill  ye  certainly*,  they  look  for  ye. 

Anc.  I fee  your  Lordfhip’s  bound,  take  a Suppofitory, 

’Tis  I Sir  5 a poor  caft  Flag  of  yours.  The  foolifh  Tartars 
They  burn  and  kill,  and’c  like  your  Honour,  kill  us. 

Kill  with  Guns,  with  Guns  my  Lord,  with  Guns,  Sir. 

What  fays  your  Lordfhip  to  a Chick  in  fori  el  Sops? 

Put.  Go,  go  thy  ways  old  True- penny  $ • 

Thcu  haft  but  one  fault:  Thou  art  even  too  valiant. 

Come,  t’  th’  Army  Gentlemen,  and  let’s  make  them  acquainted. 

Sol.  Away,  we  are  for  ye.  [Exeunt . 

SCENE  IV. 

Enter  Alin  da,  and  two  Gentlewomen. 

Alin.  Why,  whither  run  ye  Fools  > will  ye  leave  my  Lady? 

Pet.  The  Sorter  comes,  the  Tartar  comes.  Alin.  Why,  let  him, 
I thought  you  had  fear’d  no  Men:  Upon  my  Confcience 
You  have  try’d  their  Strengths  already  j ftay  for  flume. 

Pet.  Shift  for  thy  felf,  Alinda.  [Exit. 

Alin  Beauty  bieis  ye; 

Into  what  Groom’s  Feather-Bed  will  you  creep  now, 

A • o mere  mi  (take  the  Enemy?  fweet  Youths  ye  are, 

And  of  a conitant  Courage-,  are  you  affraid  of  foining  ? 

Enter  Olympia. 

Ohm.  O my  good  Wench,  what  ftiall  become  of  us.? 

The  Pofts  come  hourly  in,  and  bring  new  Danger  * 

T he  Enemy  is  paft  the  Volga , and  bears  hither 
^ t > ait  rue  Bipod  and  Cruelty  he  carries. 

My  Brother  new  will  find  his  Fault.  Alin.  I doubt  me, 

• o "Siit  too  iare,  adam.  But  pray  fear  not, 

Ail  will  be  well,  T hope.  Sweet  Madam,  (hake  not. 


Olym. 


The  Loyal  Subjett. 

Olym.  How  earn’d  thou  by  this  Spirit?  our  Sex  trembles. 

Jilin.  I am  not  unacquainted  with  thefe  Dangers; 

And  you  (hall  know  my  Truth;  for  e’er  you  perifh, 

A hundred  Swords  fhall  pafs  through  me:  ’Tis  but  dying, 

And  Madanlf we  mud  do  it:  The  manner’s  all: 

You  have  a Princely  Birth,  take  Princely  Thoughts  to  you, 

And  take  my  Counfcl  too;  go  prefently, 

With  all  the  hafte  ye  have,  (1  wili  attend  ye) 

With  all  the  poilible  fpeed,  to  old  Lord  Archas^ 

He  honours  yc;  with  all  your  Art  perfwade  him, 

(’Twill  be  a difmal  Time  elfej  woo  him  hither, 

But  hither  Madam,  make  him  fee  the  Danger; 

For  your  new  General  looks  like  an  Afs; 

There’s  nothing  in  his  Face  but  Lofs.  Olym.  I’ll  do  it. 

And  thank  thee,  fweet  Alinda:  O my  Jewel, 

How  much  I’m  bound  to  love  thee!  by  this  Hand,  Wench, 

If  thou  wert  a Man Alin.  I wou’d  I were  to  fight  for  you. 

But  hade,  dear  Madam.  Olym.  I need  no  Spurs,  Alinda. 

S C E N E V. 

Enter  Djike%  i Poftsy  Attendants , and  Gentlemen . 

Duke . The  Lord  General  fick  now  ? is  this  a time 
For  Men  to  creep  into  their  Beds?  What’s  become,  Pod, 

Of  my  Lieutenant?  Poft.  Beaten,  and’t  plcafc  your  Grace, 

And  all  his  Forces  fparkled. 

Enter  a Gentleman. 

Duke.  That’s  but  cold  News. 

How  now,  what  good  News?  are  the  Soldiers  ready? 

Gen.  Yes,  Sir,  but  fight  they  will  not,  nor  dir  from  that  Place 
They  dand  in  now,  unlefs  they  have  Lord  Archas 
To  lead  ’em  out;  they  rail  upon  this  General, 

And  fing  Songs  of  him,  feurvy  Songs,  to  worfe  Tunes; 

And  much  they  fpare  not  you,  Sir : Here  they  fwcar 
They’ll  dand  and  fee  the  City  burnt,  and  dance  about  it, 

Unlefs  Lord  Archas  come,  before  they  fight for*t: 

It  mud  be  fo,  Sir.  Duke.  I cou’d  wifh  it  fo  too; 

And  to  that  end  I have  fent  lord  Burris  to  him; 

But  all  l fear  will  fail ; we  mud  die,  Gentlemen, 

And  one  droke  we’ll  have  for’t. 

Enter  Burris. 

What  bring’d  thou,  Burris ? 

Bur.  That  I am  loth  to  tell;  he  will  not  come,  Sir; 

1 found  him  at  his  Prayers,  there  he  tells  me. 

The  Enemy  fhall  take  him,  fit  for  Heav’n; 

I urg’d  to  him  all  our  Dangers,"  hi*  own  Worths, 


The 


8 


The  Loyal  SuhjeB. 


The  Country’s  Ruin;  nay  I kneel’d  and  pray’d  him  j 
He  fhook  his  Head,  let  fall  a Tear,  and  pointed 
Thus  with  his  Finger  to  the  Ground ; a Grave 
I think  he  meant ; and  this  was  all  he  anfwer’d. 

You  Grace  was  much  to  blame: 

Where’s  the  new  General?  Duke.  He’s  fick,  poor  Mam 
Bur.  He’s  a poor  Man  indeed,  Sir : 

Your  Grace  mud  needs  go  to  the  Soldier/ 

Duke.  They  have  fent  me  Word 
They  will  not  dir,  they  rail  at  me. 

And  all  the  fpight  they  have * [ Shout  'Within. 

What  Shout  is  that  there? 

Is  the  Enemy  come  fo  near  ? 


Enter  Archas,  Olympia,  and  Alinda. 

Olym.  I have  brought  him,  Sir, 

At  length  I have  woo’d  him  thus  far. 

Duke.  Happy  Sifter, 

O bleffed  Woman l 

Olym.  Ufe  him  nobly,  Brother; 

You  never  had  more  need:  And  Gentlemen, 

All  the  beft  Powers  ye  have  to  Tongues;  turn  prefcntly,. 

To  winning  and  perfwading  Tongues;  All  my  Art, 

Only  to  bring  him  hither,  I have  utter’d; 

Let  it  be  yours  to  Arm  him;  And,  good  my  Lord, 

Though  I exceed  the  Limit  you  allow’d  me, 

Which  was  the  happinefs  to  bring  ye  hither, 

And  not  to  urge  ye  farther;  yet,  fee  your  Country, 

Out  of  your  own  fweec  Spirit  now  behold  it: 

Turn  round,  and  look  upon  the  Miferies, 

On  every  fide  the  Fears;  O fee  the  Dangers;. 

:W e find  ’em  fooneft,  therefore  hear  me  firft,  Sin 
Duke.  Next  hear  your  Prince: 

You  have  faid  you  lov’d  him,  Archas  y 
And  thought  your  Life  too  little  for  his  Service; 

Think  not  your  Vow  too  great  now,  now  the  Time  is, 

And  now  you  arc  brought  to  th’  Teft,  touch  right  now  Soldier, 
Now  ihew  the  manly  purenefs  of  thy  Mettle; 

Now  if  thou  bceft  that  valued  Man,  that  Virtue, 

That  great  Obedience  teaching  all,  now  ftand  iu 
What  have  I faid  forget,  my  Youth  was  hafty, 

And  what  you  faid  your  felf  forgive,  you  were  angry. 

If  Men  could  live  without  their  Faults,  they  were  Gods,  Archas . 
He  weeps,  and  holds  his  Hands  up:  ,To  him,.  Burris . 

Bur.  You  have  fhew’d  the  Prince  his  Faults  > 

And  like  a good  Surgeon  you  have  laid 
That  to  ’em  makes  ’em  fmart;  lie  feds  it,. 

Let  ’em  not  fetter  now.  Sir*  your  own  Honoeir, 

Thai 


The  Loyal  SuhjeB. 


\9 


The  Bounty  of  that  Mind,  and  your  /Allegiance, 

?Gainft  which,  I take  it,  Heav’n  gives  no  Command,  Sir, 
Normals  no  Vow,  can  better  teach  ye  now 
What  ye  have  to  do,  than  I,  or  this  neceffity  * 

Only  this  little’s  left}  wou’d  ye  do  nobly, 

And  in  the  Eye  of  Honour  truly  triumph  ? 

Conquer  that  Mind  firft,  and  then  Men  are  nothing. 

Alin.  Laft,  a poor  Virgin  kneels } for  Loves  fake,  General, 

If  I ever  you  have  lov’d  } for  her  fake,  Sir, 

For  your  own  Honefty,  which  is  a Virgin, 

Look  up,  and  pity  us,  be  bold  and  fortunate. 

You  are  a Knight,  a good  and  noble  Soldier, 

And,  when  your  Spurs  were  giv’n  ye,  your  Sword  buckl’d. 

Then  were  you  fworn  for  Virtue’s  Caufe,  for  Beauty’s, 

For  Chaftity  to  ftrike } ftrike  now,  they  fuffer ; 

Now  draw  your  Sword,  or  elfe  you  are  Recreant, 

Only  a Knight  i’  th’  Heels,  i’  th’  Heart  a Coward} 

Your  firft  Vow  Honour  made,  your  laft  but  Anger. 

Arch.  How  like  my  virtuous  Wife  this  thing  looks,  fpeaks  too? 
So  wou’d  fhe  chide  my  Dulnefs.  Fair  one,  I thank  ye. 

My  gracious  Sir,  your  Pardon,  next  your  Hand  : 

Madam,  your  Favour,  and  your  Prayers}  Gentlemen, 

Your  W idles,  and  your  Loves}  and  pretty  fweet  one, 

A favour  for  your  Soldier.  Olym.  Give  him  this,  Wench. 

Alin.  Thus  do  I tye  on  Vidtory.  Arch.  My  Armour, 

My  Horfe,  my  Sword,  my  touch  Staff,  and  my  Fortune, 

And  Olin  now  I come  to  fhake  thy  Glory. 

Duke.  Go,  Brave  and  Profperous,  our  Loves  go  with  thee. 

Olym . Full  of  thy  Virtue,  and  our  Pray’rs  attend  thee. 

Bur.&c.  Lode  with  Vidtory,  and  we  to  honour  thee. 

Alin.  Come  home  the  Son  of  Honour, 

And  I’ll  ferve  ye.  [Exeunt, 


A C T II.  S C E N E I. 

Enter  Duke , Burris,  and  two  Gentlemen . 

Duke,  'KTO  News  of  Archas  yet? 

JlN  Bur.  But  now,  and’t  pleafe  ye, 

A Poft  came  in.  Letters  he  brought  none  with  him, 

But  this  deliver’d.  He  faw  the  Armies  join, 

The  Game  of  Blood  begun,  and  by  our  General, 

Who  never  was  acquainted  but  with  Conqueft, 

So  bravely  fought,  he  faw  the  Tartars  fhaken, 

And  there  he  laid  he  left  ’em.  Duke.  Where’?  Boroskie  ? 

Ci  i Cent, 


io  7 he  Loyal  Subject . 

i Gent . He’s  up  again,  and’t  pleafe  ye.  Bur.  Sir,  methinks 
This  News  fhould  make  ye  lightfome,  bring  Joy  to  ye, 

Jt  ftrikes  our  Hearts  with  general  Comfort.  [ Exit  B&ke.- 

Gone?  What  fhou’d  this  mean,  fofuddenly? 

He’s  well?  z Gent.  We  fee  no  other. 

i Gent . Wou’d  the  reft  Were  well  too, 

That  put  thefe  Starts  into  him.  Bur.  I’ll  go  after  him, 
z Gent.  'Twill  not  be  fit,  Sir:  H'as  fome  Secret  in  him 
He  would  not  be  difturb’d  in.  Know  you  any  thing 
Has  croft  him  fince  the  General  went?  Bur.  Not  any  • 

If  there  had  been,  1 am  fure  1 fhould  have  found  it: 

Only  I have  heard  him  oft  complain  for  Mony  : 

Mony  he  fays  he  wants.  i Gent.  It  may  be  that  then. 

Bur.  To  him  that  has  fo  many  ways  to  raife  ir, 

And  thofe  fo  honeft,  it  cannot  be. 

Enter  Duke , and  Boroskie. 

I Gent.  He  comes  back. 

And  Lord  Boroskie  with  him.  Bur.  There  the  Game  goes, 

I fear  fome  new  thing  hatching.  Duke.  Come  hither,  Burris . 

Go  fee  my  Sifter,  and  commend  me  to  her. 

And  to  my  little  Miftrefs  give  this  Token  5 
Tell  her  I’ll  fee  her  fhortly.- 

Bur.  Yes,  I fhall,  Sir.  [Exe.  Bur.  and  Gent: 

Duke.  Wait  you  without.  I wou’d  yet  try  him  further. 

Bor.  'Twill  not  be  much  amifs.  Has  your  Grace  heard  yet 
Of  what  he  has  done  i’  th'  Field  ? Duke.  A Poll  but  now 
Came  in,  who  faw  'em  join,  and  has  deliver’d, 

The  Enemy  gave  Ground  before  he  parted:  Bor.  ’Tis  well. 

Duke.  Come,  fpeak  thy  Mind  Man.  ’Tis  not  for  fighting, 

A Noife  of  War,  I keep  thee  in  my  Bofom  5 
Thy  Ends  arc  nearer  to  me*  from  my  Childhood 
Thou  brought’ft  me  up:  And  like  another  Nature, 

Made  good  all  my  Neceffities.  Speak  boldly. 

Bor.  Sir,  what  I utter,  will  be  thought  but  Envy, 

Though  I intend,  high  Hcav’n  knows,  but  your  Honour, 

When  vain  and  empty  People  fhall  proclaim  me 

Good  Sir,  excufe  me.  Duke.  Do  you  fear  me  for  your  Enemy? 
Speak  on  your  Duty.  Bor.  Then  l muft,  and  dare,  Sir. 

When  he  comes  home,  take  heed  the  Court  receive  him  not, 
Take  heed  he  meet  not  withi  their  Loves  and  Praifes, 

That  Glafs  will  fhew  him  ten  times  greater,  Sir, 

(And  make  him  ftrive  to  make  good  that  Proportion*) 

Than  e’er  his  Fortune  bred  him  * he  is  honourable, 

At  leaft  I ftrive  to  underftand  him  fo, 

And  of  a Nature,  if  not  this  way  Poyfon’d, 

Perfe£t  enough,  eafie,  and  fweet,  but  thofe  are  foen  feduc’d,  Sir} 

He’s 


IX 


7 he  L oyal  SuljeU. 

He’s  a great  Man,  and  what  that  Pill  may  work, 

Prepar’d  by  general  Voices  of  the  People, 

Is  the  end  of  all  my  Oounfel,  only  this,  Sir, 

Let  him  retire  a while,  there’s  more  hangs  by  it
