Canonical Title: MACBETH
Requested Title: MACBETH
Authors: Sir William Davenant; William Shakespeare, probably adapted by Sir William Davenant
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: macbeth02shakgoog
Item Title: Macbeth
Item Creator: William Shakespeare
Item Year: 1897
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: MACBETH
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/macbeth02shakgoog/macbeth02shakgoog_djvu.txt
Sonni: Bootland; Kngland. 



MACBETH. 



ACT I. 



Scene I. A desert place. 

Thunder and lightning. Enter three Witches. 

First Witch, When shall we three meet again 
In thunder, lightning, or in rain ? 

Sec. Witch. When the hurlyburly 's done, 
When the battle 's lost and won. 

Third Witch. That will be ere the set of sun. 

First Witch. Where the place ? 

Sec. Witch. Upon the heath. 

Third Witch. There to meet with Macbeth. 

First Witch. I come, Graymalkinl 

Sec. Witch. Paddock calls. 

Third Witch. Anon. lo 

All. Fair is foul, and foul is fair ; 
Hover through the fog and filthy air. [Exeunt. 

8. Graymalkin : name of the typical female cat, as Reynard 
for fox. 

9. Paddock =: toad. [The witches respond to the summons of 
their familiar spirits, accustomed to take the forms of cat and 
toad.] 

10. [Anon = presently ; here, <* I am coming at once."] 



8 MACBETH. [Act I. 

Scene II. A ecump near Forres. 

Alarum within. Enter Dukcast, Maloolbi, Donalbaik, Lennox, with 
Attendants, meeting a bleeding Sergeant. 

Dun. What bloody man is that? He can report, 
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt 
The newest state. 

Mai. This is the sergeant 

Who like a good and hardy soldier fought 
'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend ! 
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil 
As thou didst leave it. 

Ser. Doubtful it stood ; 

As two spent swimmers, that do cling together 
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald — 
Worthy to be a rebel, for to that lo 

The multiplying villanies of nature 
Do swarm upon him — from the western isles 
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied ; 
And fortune, on hi^ damned quarrel smiling, 
Show'd like a rebel's whore : but all 's tpo weak : 
For brave Macbeth — well he deserves that name — 
Disdaining fortime, with his brandfish'd steel, 
Which smok'd with bloody execution. 
Like valour's minion carved out his passage 
Till he faced the slave ; so 

Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him. 
Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps. 
And fix'd his head upon our battlements. 

Dun. O valiant cousin ! worthy gentleman I 

13. kerns and gallcwglassea. Kerns were light-armed 
troops ; gallowglasses wore mail, and used long heavy swords. 

21. "Wliich ne'er shook hands : a passage incurahly cor- 
rupted. If these words were omitted, as they might well be, 
iio^Ii sense and rbjrthm would he complete. 



Scene IL] MACBETH. 9 

8er. As whence the sun 'gins his reflection 
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break, 
So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come 
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark : 
No sooner justice had with valour arm'd 
Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, si 
But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage. 
With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men 
Began a fresh assault. 

Dun. Dismay'd not this 

Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo ? 

Ser. Yes ; 

As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. 
If I say sooth, I must report they were 
As cannons overcharged with double cracks ; so they 
Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe : 
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, 
Or memorize another Golgotha, m 

I cannot tell. 
But I am faint, my gashes cry for help. 

Dun. So well thy words become thee as thy wounds ; 
They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons. 

[Exit Sergeant^ attended. 

Who comes here ? 

Enter Ross. 

Mai. The worthy thane of Ross. 

37. cracks = loads, charges which when discharged make a 
noise, or craok. 

40. [Memorize another Oolgotha = make memorable an- 
other place of death, like the Grolgotha of the cmcifizion.] 

41. [I cannot tell = I do not know what to think, or say, of 
it : an Elizabethan colloquialism.] 

45. thane = a servant of the king : an Anglo-Saxon title of 
nobility next below that of earl. 



10 MACBETH. [ActL 

Len. What a haste looks through his eyes! So 
should he look 
That seems to speak things strange. 

Ross. God save the King ! 

Dun. Whence cam'st thou, worthy thane ? 

Moss. From Fife, great king ; 

Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky 
And fan our people cold. Norway himself, » 

With terrible numbers, 
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor 
The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict ; 
Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof. 
Confronted him with self-eomparisons, 
Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. 
Curbing his lavish spirit : and, to conclude. 
The victory fell on us. 

Dun. Great happiness I 

Ross. That now 

Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition ; 
Nor would we deign him burial of his men eo 

Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch 
Ten thousand dollars to our general use. 

Dun. No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive 
Our bosom interest : go pronounce his present death, 
And with his former title greet Macbeth. 

Moss. I 'U see it done. 

Dun. What he hath lost noble Macbeth hath won. 

[Exeunt, 

54. [Bellona's biidegroom: Macbeth is evidently meant. 
The mythological allusion is faulty, unless the expression be 
taken as equivalent to " a very bridegroom for Bellona, a hero 
worthy to wed her."] 

55. [aelf-coinparlsonB = likenesses of himself, counterparts; 
£be meaning is brought out in the next line.] 



Scene IH.] MACBETH. 11 

Scene m. A he^xth near Forres. 

Thunder. Enter the three Witches. 

First Witch. Where hast thou been, sister? 

Sec. Witch. Killing swine. 

Third Witch. Sister, where thou ? 

First Witch. A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her 
lap, 
And munch'd, and munoh'd, and munch'd : — " Give 

me," quoth I ; 
** Aroint thee, witch I " the rump-fed ronyon cries. 
Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger : 
But in a sieve I '11 thither sail, 
And, like a rat without a tail, 
I 'U do, I 'U do, and I 'U do. lo 

Sec. Witch. I 'U give thee a wind. 

First Witch. Thou 'rt kind. 

Third Witch. And I another. 

First Witch. I myself have all the other, 
And the very ports they blow. 
All the quarters that they know 
I' th' shipman's card. 
I wiU drain him dry as hay : 
Sleep shall neither night nor day 
Hang upon his pent-house lid ; n 

6. Aroint = (manifestly) avaunt, begone; but what the word 
really means, and whence it came, no one knows. See it again, 
King Lear, Act III. Sc. 4, line 149, but nowhere else, I believe, 
in all English literature, rump-fed = coarsely, grossly fed ; 
ronyon is plainly an Eng. form of the Fr. rognon = a scabby, 
mangy person. 

9. [Steevens cites the old superstition, that ** though a witch 
could assume the form of any animal she pleased, the tail would 
still be wanting."] 

17. shipman'a card = sailor's chart. 



12 MACBETH. [Act L 

He shall live a man forbid : 
Weary se'nniglits nine times nine 
Shall he dwindle, peak and pine : 
Though his bark cannot be lost, 
Yet it shall be tempest-tost. 
Look what I have. 

Sec. Witch. Show me, show me. 

First Witch. Here I have a pilot's thumb, 
Wreck'd as homeward he did come. [Drums within. 

Third Witch. A drum, a drum I » 

Macbeth doth come. 

All. The weird sisters, hand in hand. 
Posters of the sea and land, 
Thus do go about, about : 
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine 
And thrice again, to make up nine. 
Peace I the charm 's wound up. 

Enter Macbeth and BAKQua 

Mach. So foul and fair a day I have not seen. 
Ban. How far is 't caJl'd to Forres ? What are 

these 
So withered and so wild in their attire, 4o 

That look not like th' inhabitants o' th' earth. 
And yet are on 't ? Live you ? or are you aught 
That man may question ? You seem to understand 

me. 
By each at once her chappy finger laying 
Upon her skinny lips : you should be women, 

32. The weird aistera = supposed supernatural creatures 
like the Fates, controlling destiny. Their name is pronounced 
wayrd (el as in weight), and is spelled wayward in the folio. 

39. Forrea==a town on Moray Firth, ahout twenty-five miles 
from Invemeas. 



ScKOTim.] MACBETH. 18 

And yet your beards forbid me to interpret 
That you are so; 

Mach. S})eak, if you can : what are you? 

First Witch. All hail, Macbeth I hail to thee, thane 
of Glionis ! 

Sec. Witch. All hail, Macbeth I hail to thee, thane 
of Cawdor ! 

Third Witch. All hail, Macbeth that shalt be king 
hereafter ! so 

Ban. Good sir, why do you start ; and seem to fear 
Things that do sound so fair? [To the Witchea,"] 

V th' name of truth, 
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed 
Which outwardly ye show ? My noble partner 
You greet with present grace and great prediction 
Of noble having and of royal hope, 
That he seems rapt withal : to me you speak not. 
If you can look into the seeds of time. 
And say which grain wiU grow and wUch will not, 
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear ei 

Your favours nor your hate. 

First Witch. Haill 

Sec. Witch. Hail! 

Hiird Witch. HaQ! 

First Witch. Lesser than Macbeth, and greater. 

Sec. Witch. Not so happy, yet much happier. 

Third Witch. Thou shalt get kings, though thou 
be none : 
So all hail, Macbeth and Banqno ! 

First Witch. Banquo and Macbeth, all hail ! 

Mach. Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me 
more : 70 

48. All hail. These three salutations are almost literal tran- 
seripts from Holinshed. 



14 MACBETH. [ActL 

By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis ; 

But how of Cawdor ? the thane of Cawdor lives, 

A prosperous gentleman ; and to be king 

Stands not within the prospect of belief, 

No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence 

You owe this strange intelligence ? or why 

Upon this blasted heath you stop our way 

With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you. 

[ Witches vanish* 

Ban. The earth hath bubbles, as the water has, 
And these are of them. Whither are they yan- 

ish'd ? 80 

Mach. Into the air; and what seem'd corporal 
melted 
As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd ! 
Ban. Were such things here as we do speak 
about? 
Or have we eaten on the insane root 
That takes the reason prisoner? 

Macb. Your children shall be kings. 
Ban. You shall be king. 

Mach. And thane of Cawdor too : went it not so ? 
Ban. To the selfsame tune and words. Who's 
here? 

Efder Robs and Akous. 

Moss. The King hath happily received, Macbeth, 
The news of thy success ; and when he reads 9o 

Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight. 
His wonders and his praises do contend 

71. Sinel was the name of Macbeth's father. 
84. eaten on = eaten of. insane root = root which makes 
insanity ; henbane, or perhaps hemlock, if we most read like 
Jierb doctors. 



Scene III.] MA CBETH. 16 

Which should be thine or his : silenced with that, 
In viewing o'er the rest o' th' selfsame day, 
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, 
Nothing af card of what thyself didst make, ^ 
Strange images of death. As thick as tale 
Came post with post ; and every one did bear 
Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, 
And pour'd them down before him. 

Aug. We are sent iw 

To give thee from our royal master thanks ; 
Only to herald thee into his sight. 
Not pay thee. 

Moss. And, for an earnest of a greater honour, 
He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor : 
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane I 
For it is thine. 

Ban. [Aside.'] What, can tihe Devil speak true ? 

Mach. The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you 
dress me 
In borrow'd robes ? 

Ang. Who was the thane lives yet ; 

But under heavy judgement bears that life ii« 

Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined 
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel 
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both 

97. as thick as tale = as fast as they could be told, or 
counted ; a somewhat forced comparison, but suited to the style 
of this play. The reading <* As thick as hail " is obvious and 
plausible. 

106. addition = title, something added to the mere name; 
" a handle." 

107. Devil : pronounced commonly, I am sure, in England as 
well as in Scotland, as a monosyllable, deel, in Shakespeare's 
time. 

112. line = strengthen. 



16 MACBETH. [Act L 

He labotir'd in his country's wrack, I know not ; 
But treasons capital, confess'd and proved. 
Have overthrown him. 

Mctch. \_A8ide.'] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor ! 
The greatest is behind. [2l> Ross and Angus.'\ 

Thanks for your pains. 
{^To Ban."] Do you not hope your children shall be 



When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me 
Promised no less to them? 

Ban. That trusted home i» 

Might yet enkindle you unto the crown, 
Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange : 
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm. 
The instruments of daribiess tell us truths. 
Win us with honest trifles, to betray 's 
In deepest consequence. 
Cousins, a word, I pray you. 

Mach. l^Adde.'] Two truths are told. 

As happy prologues to the swelling act 
Of the imperial theme. — I thank you, gentlemen. 
[Aside.'] This supernatural soliciting lai 

Cannot be ill, cannot be good : if ill. 
Why hath it given me earnest of success. 
Commencing in a truth ? — I 'm thane of Cawdor. 
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion 
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair 
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, 
Against the use of nature ? Present fears 
Are less than horrible imaginings : 
My thought, whose murther yet is but fantastical, 
Shakes so my single state of man that function i40 

139. [Fantastical = imaginary.] 
140-142, Siiakea so . . . "what is not : a passage highly 



Scene III.] MACBETH. 17 

Is smother'd k sunnise, aad nothing is 
But what is not. 

Ban. Look, how our partner 's rapt. 

Mach. [AsideJ] If ohance will have me king, why, 
chance may crown me. 
Without my stir. 

Ban. New honours come upon him. 

Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould 
But with the aid of use. 

Mach. {^Aside.'] Come what come may, 

Time and the hour runs through the roughest day. 

Ban. Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure. 

Mach. Give me your favour: my duU brain was 
wrought 
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains mo 
Are register'd where every day I turn 
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King. 
Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, 
The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak 
Our free hearts each to other. 

Ban. Very gladly. 

Mach. Till then, enough. Come, friends. [Exeunt. 

characteristic of the vagfue, far-reaching style of this tragedy. 
Single = weak ; function = ability to act, which is represented 
as smothered in doubt and apprehension; so that nothing seems 
to be but that which cannot be. 

147. Time and the hour: equivalent to ''time and tide/' 
in which '' tide " does not mean the ebb and flow of the sea, but 
opportunity, time suitable. [The Clarendon Press editors have 
the interesting comment, '' ' Time and the hour,* in the sense of 
time with its successive incidents, or in its measured course, 
forms but one idea. The expression seems to have been prover- 
bial. Another form of it is : ' Be the day weary, be the day 
long, At length it ringeth to evensong.' " j 



18 MACBETH. [Act L 

Scene IV. Forres. Thepalaee. 

Flourish. Enter Dukoak, Maloolbi, Dostalbain, Lennox, and 

Attendants. 

Dun. Is execution done on Cawdor ? Are not 
Those in commission yet retum'd ? 

Mai. My liege, 

They are not yet come back. But I have spoke 
With one that saw him die : who did report 
That very frankly he confess'd his treasons, 
Implored your highness' pardon and set forth 
A deep repentance : nothing in his life 
Became him like the leaving it ; he died 
As one that had been studied in his death 
To throw away the dearest thing he owed, lo 

As 't were a careless trifle. 

Dun. t There 's no art 

To find the mind's construction in the face : 
He was a gentleman on whom I built 
An absolute trust. 

Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Anous. 
O worthiest cousin I 
The sin of my ingratitude even now 
Was heavy on me : thou art so far before 
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow 
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved. 
That the proportion both of thanks and payment 
Might have been mine ! only I have left to say, so 
More is thy due than more than all can pay. 
Mach. The service and the loyalty I owe, 
In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part 
Is to receive our duties ; and our duties 
Are to your throne and state children and servants, 
10. owed = owned. [Compare Sc. 3, line 76.] 



ScftNRlV.] MACBETH. 19 

Which do but what ihey should, by doing every thing 
Safe toward your love and honour. 

Dun. Welcome hither: 

I have begun to plant thee, and will labour 
To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo, 
That hast no less deserved, nor must be known » 

No less to have done so, let me infold thee 
And hold thee to my heart. 

Ban. There if I grow,' 

The harvest is your own. 

Dun, My plenteous joys, 

Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves 
In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, 
And you whose places are the nearest, know 
We will establish our estate upon 
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter 
The Prince of Cumberland ; which honour must 
Not unaccompanied invest him only, lo 

But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine 
On all deservers. From hence to Inverness, 
And bind «s further to you. 

Mach. The rest is labour, which is not used for you : 
I 'U be myself the harbinger and make joyful 
The hearing of my wife with your approach ; 
So hmnbly take my leave. 

Dun. My worthy Cawdor I 

Mach. [Aside.'] The Prince of Cumberland ! that 
is a step 
On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, 

34. [Wanton in fulness = running to excess in their abun- 
dance.] 

39. The Prince of Cumberland. The crown of Scotland was 
not at this time strictly hereditary, and when the successor to the 
feigning king was named he was made Prince of Cumberland. 



20 MACBETH. [Act L 

For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires ; so 

Let not light see my black and deep desires : 
The eye wink at the hand ; yet let that be, 
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see. [Exit 
Dun. True, worthy Banquo ; he is full so valiant, 
And in his commendations I am fed ; 
It is a banquet to me. Let 's after him. 
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome : 

It is a peerless kinsman. [Flourish. Exeunt. 

Scene V. Inverness. Macbeth's cos^Ze. 
Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter. 

Lady M, They met me in the day of success : and I have learned 
by the perfectest report, they have more in them than mortal 
knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them further, 
they made themselves air, into which they vanished. Whiles I 
stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the King, 
who all-hailed me " Thane of Cawdor; " by which title, before, 
these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on 
of time, with << Hail, king that shalt be I " This have I thought 
good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou 
mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what 
greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell. U 

Glamis thou art, and Cawdor ; and shalt be 
What thou art promised : yet do I fear thy nature ; 
It is too full o' th' milk of hmnan kindness 
To catch the nearest way : thou wouldst be great,^ 

Art not without ambition, but without 

■ . ' 

54. True, 'worthy Banquo. Duncan's speech is the continuft^ 
tion of an unheard talk with Banquo about Macbeth while thp 
latter reveals to us his awakened ambition and foreshadows tho 
crime. 

Scene V. Enter Lady Macbeth. Li the folio, even after 
Macbeth is king, she is called merely " the lady," or *< Maobeth's 
lady " or *< wife." The title generally given her, however, seems 
happily chosen. 
B. /llCisBives=messengex8.][ 



ScKNB v.] MA CBETH. 21 

The illness should attend it : what thou wouldst highly, 
That wouldst thou holily ; wouldst not play false, 
And yet wouldst wrongly win : thou 'dst have, great 

Glamis, 
That which cries ** Thus thou must do, if thou have 

it ; " » 

And that which rather thou dost fear to do 
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither, 
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear ; 
And chastise with the valour of my tongue 
All that impedes thee from the golden round. 
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem 
To have thee crown'd withal. 

Enter a Messenger. 

What is your tidings? 

Mess. The King comes here to-night. 

Lady M. Thou 'rt mad to say it : 

Is not thy master with him ? who, were 't so. 
Would have informed for preparation. so 

Mess. So please you, it is true: our thane is 
coming : 
One of my feUows had the speed of him. 
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more 
llian would make up his message. 

Lady M. Give him tending ; 

He brings great news. [Exit Messenger. 

The raven himself is hoarse 
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan^ 
Under my battlements. Come, ^ou spirits 
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here. 
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-fujl 
Of direst cruelty I make thick my blood ; 40 

17. illness = evil nature. 

26. metaphysioal =r more than physical, supematuraL 



22 MACBETH. [Act L 

Stop up the access and passage to remorse, 

That no compunctious visitings of nature 

Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between 

The effect and it ! Come to my woman's breasts, 

And take my milk for gall, you murth'ring ministers, 

Wherever in your sightless substances 

You wait on nature's mischief ! Come, thick night, 

And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell. 

That my keen knife see not the wound it makes. 

Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, m 

To cry " Hold, hold I " 

Enter Maobbth. 

Great Glamis ! worthy Cawdor I 
Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter ! 
Thy letters have transported me beyond 
This Ignorant present, and I feel now 
The future in the instant. 

Mach, My dearest love, 

Duncan comes here to-night. 

Lady M. And when goes hence ? 

Mach. To-morrow, as he purposes. 

Lady M. O, never 

Shall sun that morrow see ! 
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men 
May read strange matters. To beguile the time, eo 

43. [Knight points out that << if fear, compassion, or any other 
compunctious visitings, stand between a cruel purpose and its 
realization, they may be said to keep peace between them, as 
one who interferes between a violent man and the object of his 
wrath keeps peace."] 

45. take my milk for gall = change my milk for gall; 
" unsex me." 

54. [Feel is a dissyllable.] 

60. [The time: as Delius (quoted by Dr. Fumess) has 
noted, ** time with the definite article means in Shakespeare the. 



Scene VL] MACBETH. 28 

Look like Hie time ; bear welcome in your eye, 
Your hand, your tongue: look like tlie innocent 

flower. 
But be the serpent under 't. He that 's coming 
Must be provided for : and you shall put 
This night's great business into my dispatch ; 
Which shall to all our nights and days to come 
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom. 

Mach. We will speak further. 

Lady M. Only look up clear ; 

To alter favour ever is to fear : 
Leave all the rest to me. \ExtwiA, 

Scene VI. Before Magbeth's castle. 

Hautboys and torches. Enter Dukcsan, Maloolh, Dokalbadt, Ban- 
quo, Lennox, Macduff, Robb, Angus, and Attendants. 

Dun. This castle hath a pleasant seat ; the air 
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself 
Unto our gentle senses. 

Ban. This guest of summer, 

The temple-haimting martlet, does approve, 
By his loved masonry, that the heaven's breath 
Smells wooingly here : no jutty, frieze. 
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird 
Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle : 

present tinie." Here the sense seems to be, '* to beguile those 
«roand you at the present time, assume an appearance appro- 
priate to the present time."] 

69. [To alter favour = to change countenance. Compare As 
You Like It, Act V. Sc. 4, line 27 ; and Julius Coesar Act I. Sc. 
2, line 91.] 

5. masonry. The martlet, or martin, builds a nest of mud 
against walls. 

7. coign of vantage : a large phrase for convenient corner. 



24 MACBETH. [Act L 

Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, 
The air is delicate. 

Enter Lady Macbeth. 

Dun. See, see, our honoured hostess I lo 

The love that follows us sometime is our trouble. 
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you 
How you shall bid God 41d us for your pains, 
And thank us for your trouble. 

Lady M. All our service 

In every point twice done and then done double 
Were poor and single business to contend 
Against those honours deep and broad wherewith 
Your majesty loads our house : for those of old. 
And the late dignities heap'd up to them. 
We rest your hermits. 

Dun. Where 's the thane of Cawdor? » 

We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose 
To be his purveyor : but he rides well ; 
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him 
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess, 
We are your guest to-night. 

Lady M. Your servants ever 

Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, 

• 

13. Gk>d 'nd = God yield, Gk)d bless. 

16. [Single business : see So. 3, line 140. Mr. White else- 
where remarks that '' there is a whimsical likeness and logical 
connection between this phrase and one which has lately come 
into vulgar vogue, * a (me^horse affair,' etc."] 

20. your hermits = those who pray for you. 

22. [Purveyor : here accented on the first syllable, and equiv- 
alent in meaning to ** forerunner," in a general sense ; as har- 
binger is used in Sc. 4, line 45. Look up the literal meaning in 
each case.] 

26. [Have ... in compt =: hold in trust, as things fo> 
which they are accountable.] 



Scene VH.] MA CBETH. 25 

To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, 
Still to return your own. 

Dun. Give me your hand 

Conduct me to mine host : we love him highly, 
And shall continue our graces towards him. so 

By your leave, hostess. [Kissing her. Exeunt. 

Scene VII. Corridor in Macbeth's castle. 

Hautboys and torches. Enter a Sewer, and divers Seryants with dishes 
and service J and pass over the stage. Then enter Macbeth. 

Mach. If it were done when 't is done, then 't were 
well. 
It were done quickly if th' assassination 
Could tranmiel up the consequence, and catch 
With his surcease success ; that but this blow 
Might be the be-all and the end-all here. 
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time. 
We 'd jump the life to come. But in these cases
