Canonical Title: MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Requested Title: MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Authors: William Shakespeare
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: midsummernightsd00shakuoft
Item Title: A midsummer-night's dream
Item Creator: Shakespeare, William, 1564-1616 ; Chambers, E. K. (Edmund Kerchever), 1866-1954
Item Year: 1900
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/midsummernightsd00shakuoft/midsummernightsd00shakuoft_djvu.txt
play  dissolves  in  mirth,  and  while  the  musicians  break  into 
the  exquisite  poetry  of  the  epithalamium,  the  playwright 
stands  and  watches  us  with  the  smile  of  wise  tolerance  on  his 
lips. 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S  DREAM 


DRAMATIS   PERSONS. 

THESEUS,  Duke  of  Athens. 
EGEUS,  father  to  Hermia. 

LYSANDER,     1  .    . 

J-in  love  with  Hermia 
DEMETRIUS,  / 

PHILOSTRATE,  Master  of  the  Revels  to  Theseus. 

QUINCE,  a  carpenter. 

SNUG,  a  joiner. 

BOTTOM,  a  weaver. 

FLUTE,  a  bellows-mender. 

SNOUT,  a  tinker. 

STARVELING,  a  tailor. 

HIPPOLYTA,  Queen  of  the  Amazons,  betrothed  to  Theseus. 
HERMIA,  daughter  to  Egeus,  in  love  with  Lysander. 
HELENA,  in  love  with  Demetrius. 

OBERON,  King  of  the  fairies. 
TITANIA,  Queen  of  the  fairies. 
PUCK,  or  Robin  Goodfellow. 
PEASEBLOSSOM,     -v 

COBWEB, 

,,  >  fames. 

MOTH, 

MUSTARUSEED,     / 

Other  fairies  attending  their  King  and  Queen.     Attendants  on  Theseus 
and  Hippolyta. 

PLACE  :  A  thens  and  a  -wood  near  it. 

TIME:  istday—Acti. 

•znd  day — Act  ii.-Act  iv.t  Sc.  i. 
yd  day — Act  iv.  Sc.  i.  to  end. 


A 

MIDSUMMER-NIGHTS    DREAM. 


ACT   I. 

SCENE  .1.     Athens.     The  palace  of  THESEUS. 

Enter  THESEUS,  HIPPOLYTA,  PHILOSTRATE,  and 
Attendants. 

The.  Now,  fair  Hippolyta,  our  nuptial  hour 
Draws  on  apace;  four  happy  days  bring  in 
Another  moon :  but,  O,  methinks,  how  slow 
This  old  moon  wanes!  she  lingers  my  desires, 
Like  to  a  step-dame  or  a  dowager 
Long  withering  out  a  young  man's  revenue. 

Hip.  Four  days  will  quickly  steep  themselves  in  night; 
Four  nights  will  quickly  dream  away  the  time; 
And  then  the  moon,  like  to  a  silver  bow 
New-bent  in  heaven,  shall  behold  the  night  10 

Of  our  solemnities. 

The.  Go,  Philostrate, 

Stir  up  the  Athenian  youth  to  merriment; 
Awake  the  pert  and  nimble  spirit  of  mirth: 
Turn  melancholy  forth  to  funerals; 

The  pale  companion  is  not  for  our  pomp.  [.Exit  Philostrate 
Hippolyta,  I  woo'd  thee  with  my  sword, 
And  won  thy  love,  doing  thee  injuries; 

29 


30  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S  DREAM  [Act  I 

But  I  will  wed  thee  in  another  key, 

With  pomp,  with  triumph  and  with  revelling. 

Enter  EGEUS,  HERMIA,  LYSANDER,  and  DEMETRIUS. 

Ege.  Happy  be  Theseus,  our  renowned  duke !  20 

The.  Thanks,  good  Egeus:  what's  the  news  with  thee? 

£ge.  Full  of  vexation  come  I,  with  complaint 
Against  my  child,  my  daughter  Hermia. 
Stand  forth,  Demetrius.     My  noble  lord, 
This  man  hath  my  consent  to  marry  her. 
Stand  forth,  Lysander;  and,  my  gracious  duke, 
This  man  hath  bewitch'd  the  bosom  of  my  child: 
Thou,  thou,  Lysander,  thou  hast  given  her  rhymes 
And  interchanged  love-tokens  with  my  child: 
Thou  hast  by  moonlight  at  her  window  sung  30 

With  feigning  voice  verses  of  feigning  love, 
And  stolen  the  impression  of  her  fantasy 
With  bracelets  of  thy  hair,  rings,  gawds,  conceits, 
Knacks,  trifles,  nosegays,  sweetmeats,  messengers 
Of  strong  prevailment  in  unharden'd  youth: 
With  cunning  hast  thou  filch'd  my  daughter's  heart, 
Turn'd  her  obedience  which  is  due  to  me, 
To  stubborn  harshness:  and,  my  gracious  duke, 
Be 't  so  she  will  not  here  before  your  grace 
Consent  to  marry  with  Demetrius,  4° 

I  beg  the  ancient  privilege  of  Athens, 
As  she  is  mine,  I  may  dispose  of  her: 
Which  shall  be  either  to  this  gentleman 
Or  to  her  death,  according  to  our  law 
Immediately  provided  in  that  case. 

The.  What  say  you,  Hermia?  be  advised,  fair  maid 
To  you  your  father  should  be  as  a  god; 
One  that  composed  your  beauties,  yea,  and  one 
To  whom  you  are  but  as  a  form  in  wax 


Scene  i]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  31 

By  him  imprinted  and  within  his  power  50 

To  leave  the  figure  or  disfigure  it. 
Demetrius  is  a  worthy  gentleman. 

Her.  So  is  Lysander. 

The.  In  himself  he  is; 

But  in  this  kind,  wanting  your  father's  voice, 
The  other  must  be  held  the  worthier. 

Her.  I  would  my  father  look'd  but  with  my  eyes. 

The.  Rather  your  eyes  must  with  his  judgment  look. 

Her.  I  do  entreat  your  grace  to  pardon  me. 
I  know  not  by  what  power  I  am  made  bold, 
Nor  how  it  may  concern  my  modesty,  60 

In  such  a  presence  here  to  plead  my  thoughts: 
But  I  beseech. your  grace  that  I  may  know 
The  worst  that  may  befall  me  in  this  case, 
If  I  refuse  to  wed  Demetrius. 

The.  Either  to  die  the  death  or  to  abjure 
For  ever  the  society  of  men. 
Therefore,  fair  Hermia,  question  your  desires; 
Know  of  your  youth,  examine  well  your  blood. 
Whether,  if  you  yield  not  to  your  father's  choice, 
You  can  endure  the  livery  of  a  nun,  7° 

For  aye  to  be  in  shady  cloister  mew'd, 
To  live  a  barren  sister  all  your  life, 
Chanting  faint  hymns  to  the  cold  fruitless  moon. 
Thrice-blessed  they  that  master  so  their  blood, 
To  undergo  such  maiden  pilgrimage; 
But  earthlier  happy  is  the  rose  distilPd, 
Than  that  which  withering  on  the  virgin  thorn 
Grows,  lives  and  dies  in  single  blessedness. 

Her.  So  will  I  grow,  so  live,  so  die,  my  lord, 
Ere  I  will  yield  my  virgin  patent  up  80 

Unto  his  lordship,  whose  unwished  yoke 
My  soul  consents  not  to  give  sovereignty. 

The.  Take  time  to  pause ;  and,  by  the  next  new  moon — 


32  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  I 

The  sealing-day  betwixt  my  love  and  me, 

For  everlasting  bond  of  fellowship — 

Upon  that  day  either  prepare  to  die 

For  disobedience  to  your  father's  will, 

Or  else  to  wed  Demetrius,  as  he  would; 

Or  on  Diana's  altar  to  protest 

For  aye  austerity  and  single  life.  90 

Dem.  Relent,  sweet  Hermia:  and,  Lysander,  yield 
Thy  crazed  title  to  my  certain  right. 

Lys.  You  have  her  father's  love,  Demetrius; 
Let  me  have  Hermia's:  do  you  marry  him. 

Ege.  Scornful  Lysander!  true,  he  hath  my  love, 
And  what  is  mine  my  love  shall  render  him. 
And  she  is  mine,  and  all  my  right  of  her 
I  do  estate  unto  Demetrius. 

Lys.  I  am,  my  lord,  as  well  derived  as  he, 
As  well  possess'd;  my  love  is  more  than  his;  I0° 

My  fortunes  every  way  as  fairly  rank'd, 
If  not  with  vantage,  as  Demetrius'; 
And,  which  is  more  than  all  these  boasts  can  oe, 
I  am  beloved  of  beauteous  Hermia: 
Why  should  not  I  then  prosecute  my  right? 
Demetrius,  I  '11  avouch  it  to  his  head, 
Made  love  to  Nedar's  daughter,  Helena, 
And  won  her  soul;  and  she,  sweet  lady,  dotes, 
Devoutly  dotes,  dotes  in  idolatry, 
Upon  this  spotted  and  inconstant  man.  no 

The.  I  must  confess  that  I  have  heard  so  much, 
And  with  Demetrius  thought  to  have  spoke  thereof; 
But,  being  over-full  of  self-affairs, 
My  mind  did  lose  it.     But,  Demetrius,  come; 
And  come,  Egeus;  you  shall  go  with  me, 
I  have  some  private  schooling  for  you  both. 
For  you,  fair  Hermia,  look  you  arm  yourself 
To  fit  your  fancies  to  your  father's  will; 

IMSMI 


Scene  i]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  33 

Or  else  the  law  of  Athens  yields  you  up — 

Which  by  no  means  we  may  extenuate —  120 

To  death,  or  to  a  vow  of  single  life. 

Come,  my  Hippolyta:  what  cheer,  my  love? 

Demetrius  and  Egeus,  go  along: 

I  must  employ  you  in  some  business 

Against  our  nuptial  and  confer  with  you 

Of  something  nearly  that  concerns  yourselves. 

JEge.  With  duty  and  desire  we  follow  you. 

\Exeunt  all  but  Lysander  and  Hermia. 

Lys.  How  now,  my  love!  why  is  your  cheek  so  pale? 
How  chance  the  roses  there  do  fade  so  fast? 

Her.  Belike  for  want  of  rain,  which  I  could  well  130 

Beteem  them  from  the  tempest  of  my  eyes. 

Lys.  Ay  me!  for  aught  that  I  could  ever  read, 
Could  ever  hear  by  tale  or  history, 
The  course  of  true  love  never  did  run  smooth; 
But,  either  it  was  different  in  blood, — 

Her.  O  cross!  too  high  to  be  enthrall'd  to  low. 

Lys.  Or  else  misgraffed  in  respect  of  years, — 

Her.  O  spite!  too  old  to  be  engaged  to  young. 

Lys.  Or  else  it  stood  upon  the  choice  of  friends, — 

Her.  O  hell!  to  choose  love  by  another's  eyes.  J4Q 

Lys.  Or,  it  there  were  a  sympathy  in  choice, 
War,  death,  or  sickness  did  lay  siege  to  it, 
Making  it  momentany  as  a  sound, 
Swift  as  a  shadow,  short  as  any  dream ; 
Brief  as  the  lightning  in  the  collied  night, 
That,  in  a  spleen,  unfolds  both  heaven  and  earth, 
And  ere  a  man  hath  power  to  say  '  Behold!' 
The  jaws  of  darkness  do  devour  it  up: 
So  quick  bright  things  come  to  confusion. 

Her.  If  then  true  lovers  have  been  ever  cross'd  150 

It  stands  as  an  edict  in  destiny : 
Then  let  us  teach  our  trial  patience, 

(M236)  R 


34  A   MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  1 

Because  it  is  a  customary  cross, 

As  due  to  love  as  thoughts  and  dreams  and  sighs, 

Wishes  and  tears,  poor  fancy's  followers. 

Lys.  A  good  persuasion :  therefore,  hear  me,  Hermia. 
I  have  a  widow  aunt,  a  dowager 
Of  great  revenue,  and  she  hath  no  child: 
From  Athens  is  her  house  remote  seven  leagues; 
And  she  respects  me  as  her  only  son.  160 

There,  gentle  Hermia,  may  I  marry  thee; 
And  to  that  place  the  sharp  Athenian  law 
Cannot  pursue  us.     If  thou  lovest  me  then, 
Steal  forth  thy  father's  house  to-morrow  night; 
And  in  the  wood,  a  league  without  the  town, 
Where  I  did  meet  thee  once  with  Helena, 
To  do  observance  to  a  morn  of  May, 
There  will  I  stay  for  thee. 

Her.  My  good  Lysander? 

I  swear  to  thee,  by  Cupid's  strongest  bow, 
By  his  best  arrow  with  the  golden  head,  170 

By  the  simplicity  of  Venus'  doves, 
By  that  which  knitteth  souls  and  prospers  loves, 
And  by  that  fire  which  burn'd  the  Carthage  queen, 
When  the  false  Troyan  under  sail  was  seen, 
By  all  the  vows  that  ever  men  have  broke, 
In  number  more  than  ever  woman  spoke, 
In  that  same  place  thou  hast  appointed  me, 
To-morrow  truly  will  I  meet  with  thee. 

Lys.  Keep  promise,  love.     Look,  here  comes  Helena. 

Enter  HELENA. 

Her.  God  speed  fair  Helena!  whither  away?  180 

Hel.  Call  you  me  fair?  that  fair  again  unsay. 

Demetrius  loves  your  fair:  O  happy  fair! 

Your  eyes  are  lode-stars;  and  your  tongue's  sweet  air 


Scene  i]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  3$ 

More  tuneable  than  lark  to  shepherd's  ear, 

When  wheat  is  green,  when  hawthorn  buds  appear. 

Sickness  is  catching:  O,  were  favour  so, 

Yours  would  I  catch,  fair  Hermia,  ere  I  go; 

My  ear  should  catch  your  voice,  my  eye  your  eye, 

My  tongue  should  catch  your  tongue's  sweet  melody. 

Were  the  world  mine,  Demetrius  being  bated,  190 

The  rest  I  'Id  give  to  be  to  you  translated. 

O,  teach  me  how  you  look,  and  with  what  art 

You  sway  the  motion  of  Demetrius'  heart. 

Her.  I  frown  upon  him,  yet  he  loves  me  still. 

Hel.  O  that  your  frowns  would  teach  my  smiles  such  skill! 

Her.  I  give  him  curses,  yet  he  gives  me  love. 

Hel.  O  that -my  prayers  could  such  affection  move! 

Her.  The  more  I  hate,  the  more  he  follows  me. 

Hel.  The  more  I  love,  the  more  he  hateth  me. 

Her.  His  folly,  Helena,  is  no  fault  of  mine.  200 

Hel.  None,  but  your  beauty :  would  that  fault  were  mine ! 

Her.  Take  comfort:  he  no  more  shall  see  my  face; 
Lysander  and  myself  will  fly  this  place. 
Before  the  time  I  did  Lysander  see, 
Seem'd  Athens  as  a  paradise  to  me: 
O,  then,  what  graces  in  my  love  do  dwell, 
That  he  hath  turn'd  a  heaven  unto  a  hell ! 

Lys.  Helen,  to  you  our  minds  we  will  unfold: 
To-morrow  night,  when  Phoebe  doth  behold 
Her  silver  visage  in  the  watery  glass,  210 

Decking  with  liquid  pearl  the  bladed  grass, 
A  time  that  lovers'  flights  doth  still  conceal, 
Through  Athens'  gates  have  we  devised  to  steal 

Her.  And  in  the  wood,  where  often  you  and  I 
Upon  faint  primrose-beds  were  wont  to  lie, 
Emptying  our  bosoms  of  their  counsel  sweet, 
There  my  Lysander  and  myself  shall  meet; 
And  thence  from  Athens  turn  away  our  eyes, 


36  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  I 

To  seek  new  friends  and  stranger  companies. 

Farewell,  sweet  playfellow;  pray  thou  for  us;  220 

And  good  luck  grant  thee  thy  Demetrius ! 

Keep  word,  Lysander :  we  must  starve  our  sight 

From  lovers'  food  till  morrow  deep  midnight. 

Lys.  I  will,  my  Hermia.  [Exit  Hermia 

Helena,  adieu: 
As  you  on  him,  Demetrius  dote  on  you !  \ExiL 

HeL  How  happy  some  o'er  other  some  can  be  I 
Through  Athens  I  am  thought  as  fair  as  she. 
But  what  of  that?     Demetrius  thinks  not  so; 
He  will  not  know  what  all  but  he  do  know: 
And  as  he  errs,  doting  on  Hermia's  eyes,  230 

So  I,  admiring  of  his  qualities: 
Things  base  and  vile,  holding  no  quantity, 
Love  can  transpose  to  form  and  dignity: 
Love  looks  not  with  the  eyes,  but  with  the 
And  therefore  is  wing'd  Cupid  painted  blind: 
Nor  hath  Love's  mind  of  any  judgement  taste; 
Wings  and  no  eyes  figure  unheedy  haste: 
And  therefore  is  Love  said  to  be  a  child, 
Because  in  choice  he  is  so  oft  beguiled. 
As  waggish  boys  in  game  themselves  forswear,  240 

So  the  boy  Love  is  perjured  everywhere: 
For  ere  Demetrius  look'd  on  Hermia's  eyne, 
He  hail'd  down  oaths  that  he  was  only  mine; 
And  when  this  hail  some  heat  from  Hermia  felt, 
So  he  dissolved,  and  showers  of  oaths  did  melt 
I  will  go  tell  him  of  fair  Hermia's  flight: 
Then  to  the  wood  will  he  to-morrow  night 
Pursue  her;  ,and  for  this  intelligence 
If  I  have  thanks,  it  is  a  dear  expense: 

But  herein  mean  I  to  enrich  my  pain,  250 

To  have  his  sight  thither  and  back  again.  [Exit. 


Scene  2]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM-  37 

SCENE  II.     Athens.     QUINCE'S  house. 

Enter  QUINCE,  SNUG,  BOTTOM,  FLUTE,  SNOUT,  and 
STARVELING. 

Quin.  Is  all  our  company  here? 

Bot.  You  were  best  to  call  them  generally,  man  by  man, 
according  to  the  scrip. 

Quin.  Here  is  the  scroll  of  every  man's  name,  which  is 
thought  fit,  through  all  Athens,  to  play  in  our  interlude  before 
the  duke  and  the  duchess,  on  his  wedding-day  at  night. 

Bot.  First,  good  Peter  Quince,  say  what  the  play  treats  on, 
then  read  the  names  of  the  actors,  and  so  grow  to  a  point. 

Quin.  Marry,  our  play  is,  The  most  lamentable  comedy, 

and  most  cruel  death  of  Pyramus  and  Thisby.  i  o 

Bot.  A  very  good  piece  of  work,  I  assure  you,  and  a  merry. 

Now,  good  Peter  Quince,  call  forth  your  actors  by  the  scroll 

Masters,  spread  yourselves. 

Quin.  Answer  as  I  call  you.     Nick  Bottom,  the  weaver. 
Bot.  Ready.     Name  what  part  I  am  for,  and  proceed. 
Quin.  You,  Nick  Bottom,  are  set  down  for  Pyramus. 
Bot.  What  is  Pyramus?  a  lover,  or  a  tyrant? 
Quin.  A  lover,  that  kills  himself  most  gallant  for  love. 
Bot.  That  will  ask  some  tears  in  the  true  performing  of  it: 
if  I  do  it,  let  the  audience  look  to  their  eyes;  I  will  move 
storms,  I  will  condole  in  some  measure.     To  the  rest:  yet 
my  chief  humour  is  for  a  tyrant :  I  could  play  Ercles  rarely, 
or  a  part  to  tear  a  cat  in,  to  make  all  split  23 

The  raging  rocks 
And  shivering  shocks 
Shall  break  the  locks 
Of  prison  gates; 
And  Phibbus'  car 
Shall  shine  from  far 

And  make  and  mar  30 

The  foolish  Fates, 


38  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  I 

This  was  lofty !  Now  name  the  rest  of  the  players.  This  is 
Ercles'  vein,  a  tyrant's  vein;  a  lover  is  more  condoling. 

Quin.  Francis  Flute,  the  bellows-mender. 

Flu.  Here,  Peter  Quince. 

Quin.  Flute,  you  must  take  Thisby  on  you. 

Flu.  What  is  Thisby?  a  wandering  knight? 

Quin.  It  is  the  lady  that  Pyramus  must  love. 

Flu.  Nay,  faith,  let  not  me  play  a  woman;  I  have  a  beard 
coming.  40 

Quin.  That 's  all  one:  you  shall  play  it  in  a  mask,  and  you 
may  speak  as  small  as  you  will. 

Bot.  An  I  may  hide  my  face,  let  me  play  Thisby  too,  I  'D 
speak  in  a  monstrous  little  voice,  'Thisne,  Thisne';  'Ah 
Pyramus,  my  lover  dear!  thy  Thisby  dear,  and  lady  dear!' 

Quin.  No,  no;  you  must  play  Pyramus:  and,  Flute,  you 
Thisby. 

Bot.  Well,  proceed. 

Quin.  Robin  Starveling,  the  tailor. 

Star.  Here,  Peter  Quince.  50 

Quin.  Robin  Starveling,  you  must  play  Thisby's  mother. 
Tom  Snout,  the  tinker. 

Snout.  Here,  Peter  Quince. 

Quin.  You,  Pyramus'  father:  myself,  Thisby's  father. 
Snug,  the  joiner;  you,  the  lion's  part:  and,  I  hope,  here  is  a 
play  fitted. 

Snug.  Have  you  the  lion's  part  written?  pray  you,  if  it  be, 
give  it  me,  for  I  am  slow  of  study. 

Quin.  You  may  do  it  extempore,  for  it  is  nothing  but  roar- 
ing. 60 

Bot.  Let  me  play  the  lion  too:  I  will  roar,  that  I  will  do 
any  man's  heart  good  to  hear  me;  I  will  roar,  that  I  will 
make  the  duke  say,  "Let  him  roar  again,  let  him  roar  again" 

Quin.  An  you  should  do  it  too  terribly,  you  would  fright 
the  duchess  and  the  ladies,  that  they  would  shriek;  and  that 
•were  enough  to  hang  us  all 


Scene  2]        A   MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  39 

All.  That  would  hang  us,  every  mother's  son. 

Bot.  I  grant  you,  friends,  if  that  you  should  fright  the 
ladies  out  of  their  wits,  they  would  have  no  more  discretion 
but  to  hang  us :  but  I  will  aggravate  my  voice  so  that  I  will 
roar  you  as  gently  as  any  sucking  dove;  I  will  roar  you  an 
't  were  any  nightingale.  72 

Quin.  You  can  play  no  part  but  Pyramus;  for  Pyramus  is 
a  sweet-faced  man;  a  proper  man,  as  one  shall  see  in  a 
summer's  day;  a  most  lovely  gentleman-like  man:  therefore 
you  must  needs  play  Pyramus. 

Bot.  Well,  I  will  undertake  it  What  beard  were  I  best  to 
play  it  in? 

Quin.  Why,  what  you  will. 

Bot.  I  will  discharge  it  in  either  your  straw-colour  beard, 
your  orange- tawny  beard,  your  purple-in-grain  beard,  or  your 
French-crown-colour  beard,  your  perfect  yellow.  82 

Quin.  Some  of  your  French  crowns  have  no  hair  at  all,  and 
then  you  will  play  barefaced.  But,  masters,  here  are  your 
parts:  and  I  am  to  entreat  you,  request  you  and  desire  you, 
to  con  them  by  to-morrow  night;  and  meet  me  in  the  palace 
wood,  a  mile  without  the  town,  by  moonlight;  there  will  we 
rehearse,  for  if  we  meet  in  the  city,  we  shall  be  dogged  with 
company,  and  our  devices  known.  In  the  meantime  I  will 
draw  a  bill  of  properties,  such  as  our  play  wants.  I  pray  you, 
fail  me  not.  91 

Bot.  We  will  meet;  and  there  we  may  rehearse  most  ob- 
scenely and  courageously.  Take  pains;  be  perfect:  adieu. 

Quin.  At  the  duke's  oak  we  meet. 

Bot.  Enough;  hold  or  cut  bow-strings.  \Exeunt. 


40  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHTS   DREAM.  [Act  II 

ACT   II. 

SCENE  I.     A  wood  near  Athens. 
Enter,  from  opposite  sides,  a  Fairy,  and  PUCK. 

Puck.  How  now,  spirit  1  whither  wander  you? 
fat.  Over  hill,  over  dale, 

Thorough  bush,  thorough  brier, 

Over  park,  over  pale, 

Thorough  flood,  thorough  fire, 

I  do  wander  every  where, 

Swifter  than  the  moone's  sphere; 

And  I  serve  the  fairy  queen, 

To  dew  her  orbs  upon  the  green. 

The  cowslips  tall  her  pensioners  be:  ic 

In  their  gold  coats  spots  you  see ; 

Those  be  rubies,  fairy  favours, 

In  those  freckles  live  their  savours : 

I  must  go  seek  some  dewdrops  here 

And  hang  a  pearl  in  every  cowslip's  ear. 

Farewell,  thou  lob  of  spirits;  I  '11  be  gone: 

Our  queen  and  all  her  elves  come  here  anon. 
Puck.  The  king  doth  keep  his  revels  here  to-night: 
Take  heed  the  queen  come  not  within  his  sight; 
For  Oberon  is  passing  fell  and  wrath,  20 

Because  that  she  as  her  attendant  hath 
A  lovely  boy,  stolen  from  an  Indian  king; 
She  never  had  so  sweet  a  changeling; 
And  jealous  Oberon  would  have  the  child 
Knight  of  his  train,  to  trace  the  forests  wild; 
But  she  perforce  withholds  the  loved  boy, 
Crowns  him  with  flowers  and  makes  him  all  her  joy: 
And  now  they  never  meet  in  grove  or  green, 
By  fountain  clear,  or  spangled  starlight  sheen, 


Scene  i]        A   MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  41 

But  they  do  square,  that  all  their  elves  for  fear  30 

Creep  into  acorn-cups,  and  hide  them  there. 

JFai.  Either  I  mistake  your  shape  and  making  quite, 
Or  else  you  are  that  shrewd  and  knavish  sprite 
CalPd  Robin  Goodfellow:  are  not  you  he 
That  frights  the  maidens  of  the  villagery; 
Skim  milk,  and  sometimes  labour  in  the  quern 
And  bootless  make  the  breathless  housewife  churn ; 
And  sometime  make  the  drink  to  bear  no  barm: 
Mislead  night-wanderers,  laughing  at  their  harm? 
Those  that  Hobgoblin  call  you  and  sweet  Puck,  40 

You  do  their  work,  and  they  shall  have  good  luck: 
Are  not  you  he? 

Puck.          .       Thou  speak'st  aright; 
I  am  that  merry  wanderer  of  the  night. 
I  jest  to  Oberon  and  make  him  smile 
When  I  a  fat  and  bean-fed  horse  beguile, 
Neighing  in  likeness  of  a  filly  foal: 
And  sometime  lurk  I  in  a  gossip's  bowl, 
In  very  likeness  of  a  roasted  crab, 
And  when  she  drinks,  against  her  lips  I  bob, 
And  on  her  withered  dewlap  pour  the  ale.  50 

The  wisest  aunt,  telling  the  saddest  tale, 
Sometime  for  three-foot  stool  mistaketh  me; 
Then  slip  I  from  her,  then  down  topples  she, 
And  "  tailor  "  cries,  and  falls  into  a  cough ; 
And  then  the  whole  quire  hold  their  hips  and  laugh, 
And  waxen  in  their  mirth,  and  neeze,  and  swear 
A  merrier  hour  was  never  wasted  there. 
But,  room,  faery!  here  comes  Oberon. 

Fai.  And  here  my  mistress.     Would  that  he  were  gone! 


(  M  238)  B2 


42  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  II 

Enter,  from  one  side,  OBERON,  with  his  train;  from  the  other, 
TITANIA,  with  hers. 

Obe.  Ill  met  by  moonlight,  proud  Titania.  60 

Tita.  What,  jealous  Oberon!     Fairies,  skip  hence: 
I  have  forsworn  his  bed  and  company. 

Obe.  Tarry,  rash  wanton :  am  not  I  thy  lord? 

Tita.  Then  I  must  be  thy  lady:  but  I  know 
When  thou  hast  stolen  away  from  fairy  land, 
And  in  the  shape  of  Corin  sat  all  day, 
Playing  on  pipes  of  corn  and  versing  love 
To  amorous  Phillida.     Why  art  thou  here, 
Come  from  the  farthest  steppe  of  India? 
But  that,  forsooth,  the  bouncing  Amazon,  70 

Your  buskin'd  mistress  and  your  warrior  love, 
To  Theseus  must  be  wedded,  and  you  come 
To  give  their  bed  joy  and  prosperity. 

Obe.  How  canst  thou  thus  for  shame,  Titania, 
Glance  at  my  credit  with  Hippolyta, 
Knowing  I  know  thy  love  to  Theseus? 
Didst  thou  not  lead  him  through  the  glimmering  night 
From  Perigenia,  whom  he  ravished? 
And  make  him  with  fair  Aegles  break  his  faith, 
With  Ariadne  and  Antiopa?  80 

Tita.  These  are  the  forgeries  of  jealousy : 
And  never,  since  the  middle  summer's  spring, 
Met  we  on  hill,  in  dale,  forest  or  mead, 
By  paved  fountain  or  by  rushy  brook, 
Or  in  the  beached  margent  of  the  sea, 
To  dance  our  ringlets  to  the  whistling  wind, 
But  with  thy  brawls  thou  hast  disturb'd  our  sport 
Therefore  the  winds,  piping  to  us  in  vain, 
As  in  revenge,  have  suck'd  up  from  the  sea 
Contagious  fogs;  which  falling  in  the  land  90 

Hath  every  pelting  river  made  so  proud 


Scene  i]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  43 

That  they  have  overborne  their  continents : 

The  ox  hath  therefore  stretch'd  his  yoke  in  vain, 

The  ploughman  lost  his  sweat,  and  the  green  corn 

Hath  rotted  ere  his  youth  attain'd  a  beard; 

The  fold  stands  empty  in  the  drowned  field, 

And  crows  are  fatted  with  the  murrion  flock; 

The  nine  men's  morris  is  fill'd  up  with  mud, 

And  the  quaint  mazes  in  the  wanton  green 

For  lack  of  tread  are  undistinguishable:  100 

The  human  mortals  want  their  winter  here. 

No  night  is  now  with  hymn  or  carol  blest; 

Therefore  the  moon,  the  governess  of  floods, 

Pale  in  her  anger,  washes  all  the  air, 

That  rheumatic  diseases  do  abound: 

And  thorough  this  distemperature  we  see 

The  seasons  alter:  hoary-headed  frosts 

Fall  in  the  fresh  lap  of  the  crimson  rose, 

And  on  old  Hiems'  thin  and  icy  crown 

An  odorous  chaplet  of  sweet  summer  buds  no 

Is,  as  in  mockery,  set:  the  spring,  the  summer, 

The  childing  autumn,  angry  winter,  change 

Their  wonted  liveries,  and  the  mazed  world, 

By  their  increase,  now  knows  not  which  is  which? 

And  this  same  progeny  of  evils  comes 

From  our  debate,  from  our  dissension; 

We  are  their  parents  and  original. 

Obe.  Do  you  amend  it  then;  it  lies  in  you: 
Why  should  Titania  cross  her  Oberon? 
I  do  but  beg  a  little  changeling  boy,  120* 

To  be  my  henchman. 

Tita.  Set  your  heart  at  rest: 

The  fairy  land  buys  not  the  child  of  me. 
His  mother  was  a  votaress  of  my  order: 
And,  in  the  spiced  Indian  air,  by  night, 
Full  often  hath  she  gossip'd  by  my  side, 


44  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  IJ 

And  sat  with  me  on  Neptune's  yellow  sands, 

Marking  the  embarked  traders  on  the  flood, 

When  we  have  laughed  to  see  the  sails  conceive 

And  grow  big-bellied  with  the  wanton  wind ; 

Which  she,  with  pretty  and  with  swimming  gait  130 

Following, — her  womb  then  rich  with  my  young  squire, — 

Would  imitate,  and  sail  upon  the  land, 

To  fetch  me  trifles,  and  return  again, 

As  from  a  voyage,  rich  with  merchandise. 

But  she,  being  mortal,  of  that  boy  did  die; 

And  for  her  sake  do  I  rear  up  her  boy, 

And  for  her  sake  I  will  not  part  with  him. 

Obe.  How  long  within  this  wood  intend  you  stay? 

Tita.  Perchance  till  after  Theseus'  wedding-day. 
If  you  will  patiently  dance  in  our  round  140 

And  see  our  moonlight  revels,  go  with  us ; 
If  not,  shun  me,  and  I  will  spare  your  haunts. 

Obe.  Give  me  that  boy,  and  I  will  go  with  thee. 

Tita.  Not  for  thy  fairy  kingdom.     Fairies,  away ! 
We  shall  chide  downright,  if  I  longer  stay. 

[Exit  Titania  with  her  train, 

Obe.  Well,  go  thy  way:  thou  shalt  not  from  this  grove 
Till  I  torment  thee  for  this  injury. 
My  gentle  Puck,  come  hither.     Thou  rememberest 
Since  once  I  sat  upon  a  promontory, 

And  heard  a  mermaid  on  a  dolphin's  back  150 

Uttering  such  dulcet  and  harmonious  breath 
That  the  rude  sea  grew  civil  at  her  song 
And  certain  stars  shot  madly  from  their  spheres, 
To  hear  the  sea-maid's  music. 

Puck.  I  remember. 

Obe.  That  very  time  I  saw,  but  thou  couldst  not 
Flying  between  the  cold  moon  and  the  earth, 
Cupid  all  arm'd:  a  certain  aim  he  took 
At  a  fair  vestal  throned  by  the  west, 


Scene  i]       A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  45 

And  loosed  his  love-shaft  smartly  from  his  bow, 

As  it  should  pierce  a  hundred  thousand  hearts;  160 

But  I  might  see  young  Cupid's  fiery  shaft 

Quench'd  in  the  chaste  beams  of  the  watery  moon, 

And  the  imperial  votaress  passed  on> 

In  maiden  meditation,  fancy-free. 

Yet  mark'd  I  where  the  bolt  of  Cupid  fell: 

It  fell  upon  a  little  western  flower, 

Before  milk-white,  now  purple  with  love's  wound, 

And  maidens  call  it  love-in-idleness. 

fetch  me  that  flower;  the  herb  I  show'd  thee  once: 

The  juice  of  it  on  sleeping  eyelids  laid  170 

Will  make  or  man  or  woman  madly  dote 

Upon  the  next  live  creature  that  it  sees. 

Fetch  me  this  herb;  and  be  thou  here  again 

Ere  the  leviathan  can  swim  a  league. 

Puck.  I  '11  put  a  girdle  round  about  the  earth 
In  forty  minutes.  \Exit 

Obe.  Having  once  this  juice, 

I  '11  watch  Titania  when  she  is  asleep, 
And  drop  the  liquor  of  it  in  her  eyes. 
The  next  thing  then  she  waking  looks  upon, 
Be  it  on  lion,  bear,  or  wolf,  or  bull,  180 

On  meddling  monkey,  or  on  busy  ape, 
She  shall  pursue  it  with  the  soul  of  love : 
And  ere  I  take  this  charm  from  off  her  sights 
As  I  can  take  it  with  another  herb, 
I  '11  make  her  render  up  her  page  to  me. 
But  who  comes  here?     I  am  invisible; 
And  I  will  overhear  their  conference. 

Enter  DEMETRIUS,  HELENA  following  him. 

Dem.  I  love  thee  not,  therefore  pursue  me  not 
Where  is  Lysander  and  fair  Hermia? 


46  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHTS  DREAM.  [Act  II 

The  one  I  '11  slay,  the  other  slayeth  me.  190 

Thou  told'st  me  they  were  stolen  unto  this  wood; 

And  here  am  I,  and  wode  within  this  wood, 

Because  I  cannot  meet  my  Hermia. 

Hence,  get  thee  gone,  and  follow  me  no  more. 

Hel.  You  draw  me,  you  hard-hearted  adamant; 
But  yet  you  draw  not  iron,  for  my  heart 
Is  true  as  steel :  leave  you  your  power  to  draw, 
And  I  shall  have  no  power  to  follow  you. 

Dem.  Do  I  entice  you  ?  do  I  speak  you  fair? 
Or,  rather,  do  I  not  in  plainest  truth  200 

Tell  you,  I  do  not,  nor  I  cannot  love  you? 

Hel.  And  even  for  that  do  I  love  you  the  more. 
I  am  your  spaniel;  and,  Demetrius, 
The  more  you  beat  me,  I  will  fawn  on  you : 
Use  me  but  as  your  spaniel,  spurn  me,  strike  me, 
Neglect  me,  lose  me;  only  give  me  leave, 
Unworthy  as  I  am,  to  follow  you. 
What  worser  place  can  I  beg  in  your  love,— 
And  yet  a  place  of  high  respect  with  me, — 
Than  to  be  used  as  you  use  your  dog?  210 

Dem.  Tempt  not  too  much  the  hatred  of  my  spirit, 
For  I  am  sick  when  I  do  look  on  thee. 

Hel.  And  I  am  sick  when  I  look  not  on  you. 

Dem.  You  do  impeach  your  modesty  too  much, 
To  leave  the  city  and  commit  yourself 
Into  the  hands  of  one  that  loves  you  not; 
To  trust  the  opportunity  of  night 
And  the  ill  counsel  of  a  desert  place 
With  the  rich  worth  of  your  virginity. 

Hel.  Your  virtue  is  my  privilege  for  that;  220 

It  is  not  night  when  I  do  see  your  face, 
Therefore  I  think  I  am  not  in  the  night; 
Nor  doth  this  wood  lack  worlds  of  company, 
For  you  in  my  respect  are  all  the  world : 


Scene  i]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  47 

Then  how  can  it  be  said  I  am  alone, 
When  all  the  world  is  here  to  look  on  me? 

Dem.  I  '11  run  from  thee  and  hide  me  in  the  brakes, 
And  leave  thee  to  the  mercy  of  wild  beasts. 

Hel.  The  wildest  hath  not  such  a  heart  as  you. 
Run  when  you  will,  the  story  shall  be  changed:  230 

Apollo  flies,  and  Daphne  holds  the  chase; 
The  dove  pursues  the  griffin;  the  mild  hind 
Makes  speed  to  catch  the  tiger;  bootless  speed, 
When  cowardice  pursues  and  valour  flies. 

Dem.  I  will  not  stay  thy  questions;  let  me  go: 
Or,  if  thou  follow  me,  do  not  believe 
But  I  shall  do  thee  mischief  in  the  wood. 

Hel.  Ay,  in  the  temple,  in  the  town,  the  field, 
You  do  me  mischief.     Fie,  Demetrius! 
Your  wrongs  do  set  a  scandal  on  my  sex:  240 

We  cannot  fight  for  love,  as  men  may  do; 
We  should  be  woo'd  and  were  not  made  to  woo.  [Exit  Dem, 
I  '11  follow  thee  and  make  a  heaven  of  hell, 
To  die  upon  the  hand  I  love  so  well.  \Exit. 

Obe.  Fare  thee  well,  nymph :  ere  he  do  leave  this  grove, 
Thou  shalt  fly  him  and  he  shall  seek  thy  love. 

Re-enter  PUCK. 

Hast  thou  the  flower  there?    Welcome,  wanderer. 

Puck.  Ay,  there  it  is. 

Obe.  I  pray  thee,  give  it  me. 

I  know  a  bank  where  the  wild  thyme  blows, 
Where  oxlips  and  the  nodding  violet  grows,  250 

Quite  over-canopied  with  luscious  woodbine, 
With  sweet  musk-roses  and  with  eglantine : 
There  sleeps  Titania  sometime  of  the  night, 
Lull'd  in  these  flowers  with  dances  and  delight; 
And  there  the  snake  throws  her  enamell'd  skin, 


48  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM  [Act  II 

Weed  wide  enough  to  wrap  a  fairy  in: 
And  with  the  juice  of  this  I  '11  streak  her  eyes, 
And  make  her  full  of  hateful  fantasies. 
Take  thou  some  of  it,  and  seek  through  this  grove: 
A  sweet  Athenian  lady  is  in  love  260 

With  a  disdainful  youth;  anoint  his  eyes: 
But  do  it  when  the  next  thing  he  espies 
May  be  the  lady:  thou  shalt  know  the  man 
By  the  Athenian  garments  he  hath  on. 
Effect  it  with  some  care  that  he  may  prove 
More  fond  on  her  than  she  upon  her  love : 
And  look  thou  meet  me  ere  the  first  cock  crow. 
fuck.  Pear  not,  my  lord,  your  servant  shall  do  so. 

[Exeunt 

SCENE  II.     Another  part  of  the  wood. 

Enter  TITANIA,  with  her  train. 

Tita.  Come,  now  a  roundel  and  a  fairy  song; 
Then,  for  the  third  part  of  a  minute,  hence; 
Some  to  kill  cankers  in  the  musk-rose  buds, 
Some  war  with  rere-mice  for  their  leathern  wings, 
To  make  my  small  elves  coats,  and  some  keep  back 
The  clamorous  owl  that  nightly  hoots  and  wonders 
At  our  quaint  spirits.     Sing  me  now  asleep; 
Then  to  your  offices  and  let  me  rest. 

The  Fairies  sing. 

You  spotted  snakes  with  double  tongue, 

Thorny  hedgehogs,  be  not  seen ;  10 

Newts  and  blind-worms,  do  no  wrong, 

Come  not  near  our  fairy  queen. 

Philomel,  with  melody 

Sing  in  our  sweet  lullaby; 
Lulla,  lulla,  lullaby,  lulla,  lulla,  lullaby: 


Scene  a]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHTS  DREAM.  49 

Never  harm, 

Nor  spell  nor  charm, 
Come  our  lovely  lady  nigh; 
So,  good  night,  with  lullaby. 

Weaving  spiders,  come  not  here;  20 

Hence,  you  long-legg'd  spinners,  hence! 
Beetles  black,  approach  not  near; 
Worm  nor  snail,  do  no  offence. 

Philomel,  with  melody,  &c. 
A  Fairy.  Hence,  away!  now  all  is  well: 
One  aloof  stand  sentinel. 

[Exeunt  Fairies.     Titania  sleeps. 

Enter  OBERQN,  and  squeezes  the  flower  on  Titanic? $  eyelids, 

Obe.     What  thou  seest  when  thou  dost  wake, 
Do  it  for  thy  true  love  take, 
Love  and  languish  for  his  sake: 
Be  it  ounce,  or  cat,  or  bear,  30 

Pard,  or  boar  with  bristled  hair, 
In  thy  eye  that  shall  appear 
When  thou  wakest,  it  is  thy  dear: 
Wake  when  some  vile  thing  is  near.  [Exit. 

Enter  LYSANDER  and  HERMIA. 

Lys.  Fair  love,  you  faint  with  wandering  in  the  wood; 

And  to  speak  troth,  I  have  forgot  our  way: 
We  '11  rest  us,  Hermia,  if  you  think  it  good, 

And  tarry  for  the  comfort  of  the  day. 
Her.  Be  it  so,  Lysander:  find  you  out  a  bed; 
For  I  upon  this  bank  will  rest  my  head.  40 

Lys.  One  turf  shall  serve  as  pillow  for  us  both ; 
One  heart,  one  bed,  two  bosoms  and  one  troth. 

Her.  Nay,  good  Lysander;  for  my  sake,  my  dear, 
Lie  further  off  yet,  do  not  lie  so  near. 


50  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  [Act  II 

Lys.  O,  take  the  sense,  sweet,  of  my  innocence ! 
Love  takes  the  meaning  in  love's  conference. 
I  mean,  that  my  heart  unto  yours  is  knit 
So  that  but  one  heart  we  can  make  of  it; 
Two  bosoms  interchained  with  an  oath; 
So  then  two  bosoms  and  a  single  troth.  50 

Then  by  your  side  no  bed-room  me  deny; 
For  lying  so,  Hermia,  I  do  not  lie. 

Her.  Lysander  riddles  very  prettily: 
Now  much  beshrew  my  manners  and  my  pride, 
If  Hermia  meant  to  say  Lysander  lied. 
But,  gentle  friend,  for  love  and  courtesy 
Lie  further  off;  in  human  modesty, 
Such  separation  as  may  weL  be  said 
Becomes  a  virtuous  bachelor  and  a  maid, 
So  far  be  distant;  and,  good  night,  sweet  friend:  60 

Thy  love  ne'er  alter  til)  thy  sweet  life  end ! 

Lys.  Amen,  amen,  to  that  fair  prayer,  say  I; 
And  then  end  life  when  I  end  loyalty ! 
Here  is  my  bed :  sleep  give  thee  all  his  rest ! 

Her.  With  half  that  wish  the  wisher's  eyes  be  press'd ! 

[They  sleep 

Enter  PUCK. 

Puck.     Through  the  forest  have  I  gone, 
But  Athenian  found  I  none, 
On  whose  eyes  I  might  approve 
This  flower's  force  in  stirring  love. 
Night  and  silence. — Who  is  here?  70 

Weeds  of  Athens  he  doth  wear; 
This  is  he,  my  master  said, 
Despised  the  Athenian  maid; 
And  here  the  maiden,  sleeping  sound, 
On  the  dank  and  dirty  ground. 
Pretty  soul!  she  durst  not  lie 


Scene  2]       A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S  DREAM.  51 

Near  this  lack-love,  this  kill-courtesy. 

Churl,  upon  thy  eyes  I  throw 

All  the  power  this  charm  doth  owe. 

When  thou  wakest,  let  love  forbid  80 

Sleep  his  seat  on  thy  eyelid; 

So  awake  when  I  am  gone; 

For  I  must  now  to  Oberon.  Exit 

Enter  DEMETRIUS  and  HELENA,  running. 

Hel.  Stay,  though  thou  kill  me,  sweet  Demetrius. 

Dem.  I  charge  thee,  hence,  and  do  not  haunt  me  thus. 

Hel.  O,  wilt  thou  darkling  leave  me?  do  not  so. 

Dem.  Stay,,  on  thy  peril :  I  alone  will  go.  [Exit. 

Hel.  O,  I  am  out  of  breath  in  this  fond  chase ! 
The  more  my  prayer,  the  lesser  is  my  grace. 
Happy  is  Hermia,  wheresoe'er  she  lies;  90 

For  she  hath  blessed  and  attractive  eyes. 
How  came  her  eyes  so  bright?     Not  with  salt  tears 
If  so,  my  eyes  are  oftener  wash'd  than  hers. 
No,  no,  I  am  as  ugly  as  a  bear; 
For  beasts  that  meet  me  run  away  for  fear: 
Therefore  no  marvel  though  Demetrius 
Do,  as  a  monster,  fly  my  presence  thus. 
What  wicked  and  dissembling  glass  of  mine 
Made  me  compare  with  Hermia's  sphery  eyne? 
But  who  is  here?     Lysander!  on  the  ground!  100 

Dead?  or  asleep?     I  see  no  blood,  no  wound. 
Lysander,  if  you  live,  good  sir,  awake. 

Lys.  \Awaking\  And  run  through  fire  I  will  for  thy  sweet 

sake. 

Transparent  Helena !     Nature  shows  art, 
That  through  thy  bosom  makes  me  see  thy  heart. 
Where  is  Demetrius?     O,  how  fit  a  word 
Is  that  vile  name  to  perish  on  my  sword! 


52  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S  DREAM.          [Act  II 

Hel.  Do  not  say  so,  Lysander;  say  not  so. 
What  though  he  love  your  Hermia?     Lord,  what  though? 
Yet  Hermia  still  loves  you:  then  be  content.  no 

Lys.  Content  with  Hermia  1     No;  I  do  repent 
The  tedious  minutes  I  with  her  have  spent. 
Not  Hermia  but  Helena  I  love: 
Who  will  not  change  a  raven  for  a  dove? 
The  will  of  man  is  by  his  reason  sway'd; 
And  reason  says  you  are  the  worthier  maid. 
Things  growing  are  not  ripe  until  their  season: 
So  I,  being  young,  till  now  ripe  not  to  reason ; 
And  touching  now  the  point  of  human  skill, 
Reason  becomes  the  marshal  to  my  will  120 

And  leads  me  to  your  eyes,  where  I  o'erlook 
Love's  stories  written  in  love's  richest  book. 

Hel.  Wherefore  was  I  to  this  keen  mockery  born? 
When  at  your  hands  did  I  deserve  this  scorn? 
Is 't  not  enough,  is  't  not  enough,  young  man, 
That  I  did  never,  no,  nor  never  can, 
Deserve  a  sweet  look  from  Demetrius'  eye, 
But  you  must  flout  my  insufficiency? 
Good  troth,  you  do  me  wrong,  good  sooth,  you  do, 
In  such  disdainful  manner  me  to  woo.  130 

But  fare  you  well:  perforce  I  must  confess 
I  thought  you  lord  of  more  true  gentleness. 
O,  that  a  lady,  of  one  man  refused, 
Should  of  another  therefore  be  abused !  [Exit 

Lys.  She  sees  not  Hermia.     Hermia,  sleep  thou  there: 
And  never  mayst  thou  come  Lysander  near! 
For  as  a  surfeit  of  the  sweetest  things 
The  deepest  loathing  to  the  stomach  brings, 
Or  as  the  heresies  that  men  do  leave 

Are  hated  most  of  those  they  did  deceive,  140 

So  thou,  my  surfeit  and  my  heresy, 
Of  all  be  hated,  but  the  most  of  me! 


Scene  i]       A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHTS  DREAM.  53 

And,  all  my  powers,  address  your  love  and  might 
To  honour  Helen  and  to  be  her  knight!  \Exit. 

Her.  [Awaking\  Help  me,  Lysander,  help  me !  do  thy  best 
To  pluck  this  crawling  serpent  from  my  breast! 
Ay  me,  for  pity!  what  a  dream  was  here! 
Lysander5  look  how  I  do  quake  with  fear: 
Methought  a  serpent  eat  my  heart  away, 
And  you  sat  smiling  at  his  cruel  prey.  150 

Lysander!  what,  removed?  Lysander!  lord! 
What,  out  of  hearing?  gone?  no  sound,  no  word? 
Alack,  where  are  you?  speak,  an  if  you  hear; 
Speak,  of  all  loves !  I  swoon  almost  with  fear. 
No?  then  1  well  perceive  you  are  not  nigh; 
Either  death  or  you  I  '11  find  immediately.  \Exit- 


ACT  III. 

SCENE  I.     The  wood.     Titania  lying  asleep. 

Enter  QUINCE,  SNUG,  BOTTOM,  FLUTE,  SNOUT,  and 
STARVELING. 

Bot.  Are  we  all  met? 

Quin.  Pat,  pat;  and  here's  a  marvellous  convenient  place 
for  our  rehearsal.  This  green  plot  shall  be  our  stage,  this 
hawthorn-brake  our  tiring-house;  and  we  will  do  it  in  action 
as  we  will  do  it  before  the  duke. 

Bot.  Peter  Quince, — 

Quin.  What  sayest  thou,  bully  Bottom? 

Bot.  There  are  things  in  this  comedy  of  Pyramus  and 
Thisby  that  will  never  please.  First,  Pyramus  must  draw  a 
sword  to  kill  himself;  which  the  ladies  cannot  abide.  How 
answer  you  that?  n 

Snout.  By  'r  lakin,  a  parlous  fear. 


54  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.         [Act  III 

Star.  I  believe  we  must  leave  the  killing  out,  when  all  is 
done. 

Bot.  Not  a  whit:  I  have  a  device  to  make  all  well.  Write 
me  a  prologue;  and  let  the  prologue  seem  to  say,  we  will  do 
no  harm  with  our  swords  and  that  Pyramus  is  not  killed 
indeed;  and,  for  the  more  better  assurance,  tell  them  that  I 
Pyramus  am  not  Pyramus,  but  Bottom  the  weaver:  thi,  will 
put  them  out  of  fear.  20 

Quin.  Well,  we  will  have  such  a  prologue;  and  it  shall  be 
written  in  eight  and  six. 

Bot.  No,  make  it  two  more;  let  it  be  written  in  eight  and 
eight. 

Snout.  Will  not  the  ladies  be  afeard  of  the  lion? 

Star,  I  fear  it,  I  promise  you. 

Bot.  Masters,  you  ought  to  consider  with  yourselves:  to 
bring  in — God  shield  us! — a  lion  among  ladies,  is  a  most 
dreadful  thing;  for  there  is  not  a  more  fearful  wild-fowl  than 
your  lion  living;  and  we  ought  to  look  to't.  30 

Snout.  Therefore  another  prologue  must  tell  he  is  not  a 
lion. 

Bot.  Nay,  you  must  name  his  name,  and  half  his  face  must 
be  seen  through  the  lion's  neck :  and  he  himself  must  speak 
through,  saying  thus,  or  to  the  same  defect, — *  Ladies,' — or 
*  Fair  ladies, — I  would  wish  you,' — or  *  I  would  request  you/ 
— or  'I  would  entreat  you, — not  to  fear,  not  to  tremble:  my 
life  for  yours.  If  you  think  I  come  hither  as  a  lion,  it  were 
pity  of  my  life:  no,  I  am  no  such  thing;  I  am  a  man  as 
other  men  are;'  and  there  indeed  let  him  name  his  name, 
and  tell  them  plainly  he  is  Snug  the  joiner.  41 

Quin.  Well,  it  shall  be  so.  But  there  is  two  hard  things; 
that  is,  to  bring  the  moonlight  into  a  chamber;  for,  you  know, 
Pyramus  and  Thisby  meet  by  moonlight. 

Snout.  Doth  the  moon  shine  that  night  we  play  our  play? 

Bot.  A  calendar,  a  calendar!  look  in  the  almanac;  find 
out  moonshine,  find  out  moonshine, 


Scene  i]        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  55 

Quin.  Yes,  it  doth  shine  that  night. 

Bot.  Why,  then  may  you  leave  a  casement  of  the  great 
chamber  window,  where  we  play,  open,  and  the  moon  may 
shine  in  at  the  casement.  51 

Quin.  Ay;  or  else  one  must  come  in  with  a  bush  of  thorns 
and  a  lanthorn,  and  says  he  comes  to  disfigure,  or  to  present, 
the  person  of  Moonshine.  Then,  there  is  another  thing:  we 
must  have  a  wall  in  the  great  chamber;  for  Pyramus  and 
Thisby,  says  the  story,  did  talk  through  the  chink  of  a  wall. 

Snout.  You  can  never  bring  in  a  wall.  What  say  you, 
Bottom? 

Bot.  Some  man  or  other  must  present  Wall:  and  let  him 
have  some  plaster,  or  some  loam,  or  some  rough-cast  about 
him,  to  signify  wall;  and  let  him  hold  his  fingers  thus,  and 
through  that  cranny  shall  Pyramus  and  Thisby  whisper.  62 

Quin.  If  that  may  be,  then  all  is  well.  Come,  sit  down, 
every  mother's  son,  and  rehearse  your  parts.  Pyramus,  you 
begin ,  when  you  have  spoken  your  speech,  enter  into  that 
brake :  and  so  every  one  according  to  his  cue. 

Enter  PUCK  behind. 

Puck.  What   hempen   home-spuns   have  we   swaggering 

here, 

So  near  the  cradle  of  the  fairy  queen? 
What,  a  play  toward!     I  '11  be  an  auditor; 
An  actor  too  perhaps,  if  I  see  cause.  70 

Quin.  Speak,  Pyramus.     Thisby,  stand  forth. 

Bot.  Thisby,  the  flowers  of  odious  savours  sweet, — 

Quin.  Odorous,  odorous. 

Bot.  odours  savours  sweet: 

So  hath  thy  breath,  my  dearest  Thisby  dear. 
But  hark,  a  voice !  stay  thou  but  here  awhile, 

And  by  and  by  I  will  to  thee  appear.  [Exit. 

Puck.  A  stranger  Pyramus  than  e'er  played  here.     [Exit* 


56  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.         [Act  III 

Flu.  Must  I  speak  now? 

Quin*  Ay,  marry,  must  you;  for  you  must  understand  he 

goes  but  to  see  a  noise  that  he  heard,  and  is  to  come  again. 

Flu.  Most  radiant  Pyramus,  most  lily-white  of  hue,        82 

Of  colour  like  the  red  rose  on  triumphant  brier, 
Most  brisky  Juvenal  and  eke  most  lovely  Jew, 

As  true  as  truest  horse  that  yet  would  never  tire, 
I  '11  meet  thee,  Pyramus,  at  Ninny's  tomb. 
Quin.  '  Ninus'  tomb ',  man :  why,  you  must  not  speak  that 
yet;  that  you  answer  to  Pyramus:  you  speak  all  your  part  at 
once;  cues  and  all.     Pyramus  enter:  your  cue  is  past;  it  is, 
*  never  tire.'  90 

Flu.  O, — As  true  as  truest  horse,  that  yet  would  never 
tire. 

Re-enter  PUCK,  and  BOTTOM  with  an  ass's  head. 

Bot.  If  I  were  fair,  Thisby,  I  were  only  thine. 

Quin.  O  monstrous!  O  strange!  we  are  haunted.  Pray 
masters!  fly,  masters!  Help! 

[Exeunt  Quince,  Snug,  Flute,  Snout,  and  Starveling. 

Puck.  I  '11  follow  you,  I  '11  lead  you  about  a  round, 

Through  bog,  through  bush,  through  brake,  through  brier 
Sometime  a  horse  I  '11  be,  sometime  a  hound, 

A  hog,  a  headless  bear,  sometime  a  fire; 
And  neigh,  and  bark,  and  grunt,  and  roar,  and  burn, 
Like  horse,  hound,  hog,  bear,  fire,  at  every  turn.          [JEx&. 

Bot.  Why  do  they  run  away?  this  is  a  knavery  of  them  to 
make  me  afeard.  102 

Re-enter  SNOUT. 

Snout.  O  Bottom,  thou  art  changed!  what  do  I  see  on 
thee? 

Bot.  What  do  you  see?  you  see  an  ass-head  of  your  own, 
do  you?  \Exit  Snout. 


Scene  i]        A   MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  57 

Re-enter  QUINCE. 

Quin.  Bless  thee,  Bottom !  bless  thee !  thou  art  translated 

[Exit. 

Bot.  I  see  their  knavery:  this  is  to  make  an  ass  of  me;  to 

fright  me,  if  they  could.     But  I  will  not  stir  from  this  place, 

do  what  they  can:  I  will  walk  up  and  down  here,  and  I  will 

sing,  that  they  shall  hear  I  am  not  afraid.  [Sings. 

The  ousel  cock  so  black  of  hue.  112 

With  orange-tawny  bill, 
The  throstle  with  his  note  so  true, 

The  wren  with  little  quill, — 
Tita.  [Awaking]  What  angel  wakes  me  from  my  flowery 

bed? 
Bot.  [Sings] 

The  finch,  the  sparrow  and  the  lark, 

The  plain-song  cuckoo  gray, 
Whose  note  full  many  a  man  doth  mark, 

And  dares  not  answer  nay; —  120 

for.  indeed,  who  would  set  his  wit  to  so  foolish  a  bird?  who 
would  give  a  bird  the  lie,  though  he  cry  'cuckoo'  never  so? 

Tita.  I  pray  thee,  gentle  mortal,  sing  again : 
Mine  ear  is  much  enamour' d  of  thy  note; 
So  is  mine  eye  enthralled  to  thy  shape; 
And  thy  fair  virtue's  force  perforce  doth  move  me 
On  the  first  view  to  say,  to  swear  I  love  thee. 

Bot.  Methinks,  mistress,  you  should  have  little  reason  for 
that:  and  yet,  to  say  the  truth,  reason  and  love  keep  little 
company  together  now-a-days;  the  more  the  pity  that  some 
honest  neighbours  will  not  make  them  friends.  Nay,  I  can 
gleek  upon  occasion.  132 

Tita.  Thou  art  as  wise  as  thou  art  beautiful. 
Bot.  Not  so,  neither :  but  if  I  had  wit  enough  to  get  out  of 
this  wood,  I  have  enough  to  serve  mine  own  turn. 
Tita.  Out  of  this  wood  do  not  desire  to  go: 


$8  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.         [Act  III 

Thou  shalt  remain  here,  whether  thou  wilt  or  no. 

I  am  a  spirit  of  no  common  rate: 

The  summer  still  doth  tend  upon  my  state; 

And  I  do  love  thee:  therefore,  go  with  me;  140 

I  '11  give  thee  fairies  to  attend  on  thee, 

And  they  shall  fetch  thee  jewels  from  the  deep, 

And  sing  while  thou  on  pressed  flowers  dost  sleep: 

And  I  will  purge  thy  mortal  grossness  so 

That  thou  shalt  like  an  airy  spirit  go. 

Peaseblossom !  Cobweb!  Moth!  and  Mustardseed! 

Enter  PEASEBLOSSOM,  COBWEB,  MOTH,  and 
MUSTARDSEED. 

Peas.  Ready. 

Cob.  And  I. 

Moth.  And  I. 

Mus.  And  I. 

All.  Where  shall  we  go? 

Tita.  Be  kind  and  courteous  to  this  gentleman; 
Hop  in  his  walks  and  gambol  in  his  eyes; 
Feed  him  with  apricocks  and  dewberries,  150 

With  purple  grapes,  green  figs,  and  mulberries; 
The  honey-bags  steal  from  the  humble-bees, 
And  for  night-tapers  crop  their  waxen  thighs, 
And  light  them  at  the  fiery  glow-worm's  eyes, 
To  have  my  love  to  bed  and  to  arise; 
And  pluck  the  wings  from  painted  butterflies 
To  fan  the  moonbeams  from  his  sleeping  eyes: 
Nod  to  him,  elves,  and  do  him  courtesies. 

Peas.  Hail,  mortal! 

Cob.  Hail! 

Moth.  Hail! 

Mus.  Hail! 

Bot.  I  cry  your  worships  mercy,  heartily :  I  beseech  your 
worship's  name.  1.61 


Scene  2j        A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.  59 

Cob.  Cobweb. 

Bot.  I  shall  desire  you  of  more  acquaintance,  good  Master 
Cobweb:  if  I  cut  my  finger,  I  shall  make  bold  with  you. 
Vour  name,  honest  gentleman? 

Peas.  Peaseblossom. 

Bot.  I  pray  you,  commend  me  to  Mistress  Squash,  your 
mother,  and  to  Master  Peascod,  your  father.  Good  Master 
Peaseblossom,  I  shall  desire  you  of  more  acquaintance  too. 
Vour  name,  I  beseech  you,  sir?  170 

Mus.  Mustardseed. 

Bot.  Good  Master  Mustardseed,  I  know  your  patience 
well:  that  same  cowardly,  giant-like  ox-beef  hath  devoured 
many  a  gentleman  of  your  house :  I  promise  you  your  kindred 
hath  made  my  eyes  water  ere  now.  I  desire  your  more  ac- 
quaintance, good  Master  Mustardseed. 

Tita.  Come,  wait  upon  him;  lead  him  to  my  bower. 
The  moon  methinks  looks  with  a  watery  eye; 

And  when  she  weeps,  weeps  every  little  flower, 

Lamenting  some  enforced  chastity.  180 

Tie  up  my  love's  tongue,  bring  him  silently.      [Exeunt. 


SCENE  II.     Another  part  of  the  wood. 
Enter  OBERON. 

Obe.  I  wonder  if  Titania  be  awaked ; 
Then,  what  it  was  that  next  came  in  her  eye, 
Which  she  must  dote  on  in  extremity. 

Enter  PUCK. 

Here  comes  my  messenger. 

How  now,  mad  spirit! 
What  night-rule  now  about  this  haunted  grove? 


60  A   MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S   DREAM.         [Act  III 

Puck.  My  mistress  with  a  monster  is  in  love. 
Near  to  her  close  and  consecrated  bower, 
While  she  was  in  her  dull  and  sleeping  hour, 
A  crew  of  patches,  rude  mechanicals, 

That  work  for  bread  upon  Athenian  stalls,  i  o 

Were  met  together  to  rehearse  a  play 
Intended  for  great  Theseus'  nuptial  day. 
The  shallowest  thick-skin  of  that  barren  sort, 
Who  Pyramus  presented,  in  their  sport 
Forsook  his  scene  and  enter'd  in  a  brake: 
When  I  did  him  at  this  advantage  take, 
An  ass's  nole  I  fixed  on  his  head: 
Anon  his  Thisbe  must  be  answered, 
And  forth  my  mimic  comes.     When  they  him  spy, 
As  wild  geese  that  the  creeping  fowler  eye,  20 

Or  russet-pated  choughs,  many  in  sort, 
Rising  and  cawing  at  the  gun's  report, 
Sever  themselves  and  madly  sweep  the  sky, 
So,  at  his  sight,  away  his  fellows  fly; 
And,  at  our  stamp,  here  o'er  and  o'er  one  falls; 
He  murder  cries  and  help  from  Athens  calls. 
Their  sense  thus  weak,  lost  with  their  fears  thus  strong, 
Made  senseless  things  begin  to  do  them  wrong; 
For  briers  and  thorns  at  their  apparel  snatch; 
Some  sleeves,  some  hats,  from  yielders  all  things  catch.     30 
I  led  them  on  in  this  distracted  fear, 
And  left  sweet  Pyramus  translated  there: 
When  in  that  moment,  so  it  came  to  pass, 
Titania  waked  and  straightway  loved  an  ass. 

Obe.  This  falls  out  better  than  I  could  devise. 
But  hast  thou  yet  latch'd  the  Athenian's  eyes 
With  the  love-juice,  as  I  did  bid  thee  do? 

Puck.  I  took  him  sleeping, — that  is  finish'd  too, — 
And  the  Athenian  woman  by  his  side; 
That,  when  he  waked,  of  force  she  must  be  eyed.  40
