Requested Title: OMACHE
Authors: John Crowne
Matched Alias: Andromache
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_andromache-a-tragedy-_racine-jean_1675
Source Title: Andromache. A tragedy, ...  1675
Source Author: Racine, Jean.
Source Date: 1675
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/andromache_1675_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Inference from sources: OMACHE is treated as an OCR-shortened Andromache. Crowne's collected-works memoir lists Andromache among his plays and says he only edited the translation for a friend; this recovery preserves the public 1675 Andromache source attribution to Racine while linking the Restoration play title to that text.

---
The Names of the Perſons.
Pyrrbus King of Epirus, in Love with Ae
4
Phenix, A Courtier. a Orfter, Son of Agumenmon, in Love with Herwiane. Pylader, Friend to Oreffes. Andromache, Widow of Hecer, à Captive, Hermione, | Daughter to . and Helene, _ 72 Na bus. SITE ORE i E, Andromar | _ LY — Women © Hermione. <6 85
Greeks, Guards, Attendants. The Scene, B uthrotes cp dix of 2-404
— 2 6 * |
SORGARGSSSESSOSARAGES: u
Prologue
Tr you new Poets hade juſt cauſe o fear,
Tet to ſave charge, to day we bold appear ff a Play by a new Poet made,
| ere bg now affventard on the Trade.
No uch of Rhime did in himſelf detect,
Nor in the leaft himſelf a Wit ſuſpecl: And being humble, better manners ſbews, Then bis own Fuftidn on yon to impoſe; 28 dig mY Wit to ripeheſs grown,
Which though not good, is better then bis own:
Ad never Doping to be one of Note,
M only turns @ ſbabby French-Mang Cal. A babit which to caſe our Phrfe be choſe, OE Neo one rich trimming upon Ragg. beſtow f. True, be. b pucht on 1071 wivſty Tale, ef Troy and Greece, 4 ftory " ſomething "WF z Aud allold things we naturally deſpiſe;
B fiuce it drew out Tears from French- Mens Eyes, Di liſh ſo much for good nature fam'd, Of fome ſmall pity will not be aſbam d.
Do net bard hearted to poor Trojans grow, 6 . ery bundred years 4g0.
| Andromache.
——— 1 I
AC ITI.
Enter Ore fes and F) Lites. Embracing, PE on Friend. Fee nas e zins
put on ; Y ures, e bf XL unexpected to reſtore us to other. Ag. Who would have thought a. ſhore: 4 Is my Vows.as this, ſhould ever have 0 : Oreftes with the 12 a Pylader?.. after ſix months naſt in deſpair to the Court of Rival Pyrrhav ſhould reſtore thee ? _ Pylad. Thanks ta the Gods who. 6 to have ſh up m e rage of comby *
eee vo l
fi — of acycene· how many tears bave I ſhed for your "acorns? = 1
+ ſome new danger ſhould ſurprise my ae
mould not. W Above | kneholly in which, 1, 2 5 entambed ... dieaded Heaven by cruel e Ade 85 BE no rs e bogs bt. e | mg and,
raw you
* Hr _— hoc th 9 8
42 Andromache. A bbs x ore ſt. Alas! Who kno Vick Ibo, N is aefucdfalt ins | y deſfiny ſhall be, I know not that depends upon 1 and who can reſolve me, wo er ſhe will ordain me lite, or death. How! bs your Soul once more enter d into that Bon- ou repoſe your life on her? What chatnis after ſich torments ſuffered could intice you again into thoſe chains > Think you that Hermione incxofabk at Sparta, ſhould be kind at Epirus: aſhamed to have offered up ſo many ſuperfluous Vows, You then adhorred and forgot her, at leaſt feemed {6c 1 find you then de- ceived me. " Oreſt. It was my (elf I hecelred.. Fiend do not inſult over an unhappy man who loves thee. Have I ever heart
concealed my from. thee ? Thou ſaweſt my firſt Langu 2 my — n Afene
Love were breathed in thy nd 0 ſed of his Daughter in — of — and rewarded the re- of his Family with the beawious Herma f. Thou then
k witneſs of my deſpair, 1 ne Wins
the Id wi So Wor was than e
Oreft. Un eben ende 4 Ae Ard I was ſuf- under Hermiones hate, ſhe was prodigal of her beauties to Mr 5 Thou knoweſt then how 8
ſought to contem me, - c Tok ll theſe peſos rf of hate, de- er rigouts,” deſpiſed her charms, and defyed her power, with my ſelf, that I had quite overthrown her Do-
That 1 alſo th
Girls, In this i calm we and I 2 „re grin y1 found all
ee ſullicient to. awake thei
3
oreft, Bur now admire any Ten eg ou Pikes —— —.— It ſcems d mur mures fill all Greece, and fide is th
* — be, ee how his alliance and
Court, the young puck Bx TY
ped. Mien the — of Her?
(ame. - This Child it ſeems was ſaved from death by 25 Mother Andromache , who deceived the ax yr the f to embrace. with all the pate of | ther, another child for hers 3, chat miſtaken child 1 ried from ber arms, and eurdered whilſt this lay Gafely con- | cc
2 Of sha informed ſince my arrival
Oreft. And now (they ay) m no heppy: Rival grrhas grows . — 2 aan ge —— — — 4a wink be — | much concern'd , complains af the long neglected 2 This creates a ſecret j joy in my Soul z — N all thewhil that een a from Revenge. Pylad. 1 — another cauſe. e y fears are juſt : For the ingrateful Herariowe again. sher powers my ill-quencht fires blaze out again j; my y man in a circle, and now end where they began. | neee |
{elf,— Loved. l i ! Incurable diſcaſe of Love! of Greece I am
P Diſtrattions Oreſt. — — —.— —ů— Icanſhatch that Adr ue unjiverlalEſtatcs - — hank e, * if inſtead of AFanax, I canra 0p Aas
32 org. |
2 .
. | "ry * * nn
—
= | |
4 Anuromuche. A Tragedy.
oreſt. Hinder me not; For in ſhort, my re- nkindled flame rages with greater fury than ever; And now finding after fo many efforts all my reſiſtance vain, I blindly reſign my (elf to the violence of my paſſion, and let it lead me whicher it will.
Oreſt. No more. I love, and I come to ſeck her I love, Herarioneʒ here, in Eyyrus in this City, in this Palace, in the very arms of Fyrrhau, and I will ſnatch her hence, or die in her ſight... But thou who art not ignorant of my Rivals affairs, tell me, what paſſes in his Court, in his Soul! Will he reſolve to reram-my Hermione 2 or fairly reſign to me the heart he raviſhed from me? |
rylad. Sir; I ſnould abuſè your hopes, : ſhould I promiſe you that. Not, that he payes her any ſuch great regard, he offers devotian now at other Altars z the fair Androwache, Hector wi- dow commands his Soul; but governs it with ſuch ſeverity, that her beauty revengcsgour quarrel and requites his paſſion with hate as great as tliat Hermidne paid to yours ; and provokes the proud Pyrrbus to ſuch exeeſs of rage, that every day he attempts either to make her embrace his Love, or dread his Power- - He threatens the life of her Infam-· Son, and makes him reſponſible 'for' his mothers diſdain: And when he finds that even this can» not ſubdue her invincible mind, then in revenge he retutns'to the firſt obedience he vowed to Hermione, falls at her feet, und payes her diflembled homage ;figlis, leſs-with Love than Fury; And in fhort, Icannot ſay what a heart (6 little maſter of it (elf, in ſd great diſorder will not dare to do- He may, Sir, perhaps
- in this'extremity-marty what he hates, deſtroy what he adores.
Oreſt. Gods! That the Fate of her I (© much adore, ſhould be at the diſpoſe of one that hates her. But how does Hermione bear this rude chmempt + | in Icy "with ict "mn ts to im at her fer im- — pardon; ind renidring-his heart with alk ſubiniſſion, glad if it can be received, and he at laſtappeaſe her rigour- This is the publick countenance ſhe ſhews 5 —— But Sir, in private, — have ſeen her weep; She hack often truſted her tears to 9 f me,
— —
Andromache. A Tragedy. - me, and to me bewailed her diſtreſs, ſometimes calling all the Gods, and oftentimes. Oreftes to her aid. | oreſt. Oh Thou ſay it this to flatter my ſorrow. If I thought | would inſtantly 2 Pylad. — of — — g 3 while finiſh Em .o to tne King. your mellage to 11 Tell him bow the —— have all refolvedithe death of . — e the — 2 — This will awake more his tenderneſs for Andr bin e him to engage the dee er in her affairs; and by cunſequence deſert Hermiowe. The more you embragz1 him in t quiirel: with the Greeks for the Protection of bis Miiſtreſſes Son, the faſter you tie the knot twixt him and his Miſtreſs. Preſs, demand fo that you may be denyed. I will conduct you to him. I left him walking in the Pallace- Garden. ut ſee he has heard of your arrival, and comes this way. i i. 1957 Ot bo Hiho ARG 2005 Oreſt. Tis well; — Go then to my cruel fair, and diſpoſe — for the viſit of a Lover, who comes not hither but for her
e e nnbract
Here
the Hero by whom ſee You chexiſhing the only remains of all the rage of | Kings rooted up by. your hand, Sir Have You forgot who Hedvr- was 2: If You. have, out cnfcebled Nation too well remembets
6 Andromache. A Tragedy. him. His very Name yet makes! our Widows and Daugh- ters tremble. Scarce a Family in Greece, but demands of this unhappy Son a Father or a Husband, whom HetFor raviſhed from 'em- And who knows what his Son ſhall one day g s we {hall ſee him deſcend into our Ports, and with all che courage of his Father, ſet our Ships a blazing in our fight... Nay ics Idare to tell my thoughts? perhaps your ſelf ſhall r ou have nou- riſnt a Sc in your F ſeverely puniſh your their revenge, ſecure yourſelf; yan Enemy, at ſent may provoke the Greeky' agamſt you, and — wwe — — for my ſafery ſtudious £ Greece for m ows too ſtudious ; I thought —— not deſcend ſo — expected ſome very 25 lime affair to be the deſign of ſo great an Embaſſy. Who would have believ d the ſon of Agememnon, and an entire People ſo of- ten triumphant, ſhould fo buſily conſpire the death of an Infant? But to whom mult he be ſacrific dꝰ Does Greece yet pretend a right to his Life > And muſt I alone of all the Greeks not be per- mitted to diſpoſe of the Captives my Lot ordained me? Les Sir; For when at the foot of ey Rum d walls the uerors did by Lot divide the ſpoils, Fortune threw into my hands Ardre- . ache and her Sou, Heexba ended her miſery near Viifes. Caſ- ſendra followed your Father to Argos 3 Over them and their Cap- 44a wig owns hey wh Did I diſpoſe of the fruits of their ' © Oreſt. Greece would not diſpute your right to greater rewards than theſe, and wiſhes a — — your
ſuare. ; ,
Tyrr. My Lot muſt be enjoy'd by my ſelf; and if it be final, let them leave to me — die enen Br they — the Trojen Empire will grow wich this Infam : Yes, it ſhall if T permit it. remote ; Things {© far off appear in a miſt to me. I know in- deed what once Trey Was; Proud inRamports, Fertile of Heroes,
—
Andromache. A Tragedy. 7 Miſkreſs of : And Ialfo know what was her Deſtiny. and what now ſhe is. Her Towns are buried in Aſhes; her Rivers filled with Blood; her Fields Deſert ; and her Infant-Prince in Chains : And in this eſtate I cannot underſtand what hopes ſhe can have of reve But if they have ſworn the death of Heffors Son, why bave they now a whole year deferredit? why
did they not kill him in the ſight of old ria? In the heat of
War any: thing was jult. Age and Infancy in vain pleaded
8 for their ne tend e eiſure to mind the rights of w and Innocenſe. Victory and Night _ cruell than —— us to bloud, and confoum- ed our Sw My againſt the conquered, was then but too ſevere; and ſhall oy Crooks ſo long ſurvive my Fury? ſhall I now in cold blood thruſt my Sword in the breaſt of a poor In- fant? No Sir; Let the Greeky vent their anger elſe-where, and ſeek in other places what remains of Troy. The courſes of my enmity are ſiniſned: And in ſhort, what was ſaved at Troy, Epirae ſhall Protect.
ore ft. Sir, You know with what artifice a falſe Iſtianar was
conducted to the death due to the Son of Hefor; And Ar, It is HeJor whom the Greeks purſue. They would by the death of the Son, perſecute the Father in his Tomb. By too much blood he has bought their rage, and it cannot expire but in his blood; and perhaps they will come to draw it in E Prevent Sir Pzrrhav. No I gladly conſent. Let em ſeek in Epirxe a ſecond Trey. Let em their hate, and diſtinguiſh no more be» twirt the blood of the and the Conquered. It ge the firſt Injuſtice wherewith Greece has rewarded the ſervice * He&oy reaped advantage by it once, and fo hereafter may his Son. | Oreif. What Sir, And will you then contemn the Command e ir take theis Val? | P did 1 r to X — 8 will alter theſe intentions; Her eyes muſt
3
mediate betwixt her Father and You 920 Pyrrhags
- ©
Androids A Tragedy.
8 | Pyrrhas. Hermione 3 Sir, may perhaps be deat to me; "But 1 can loye Non andnot be a ſlave to ber Father. Love ſhall take its due 1 yy 3 it 2 84 K but not with | mine Honour. Mean while Sir, ou pleaſe 5 the fair Daughter of Helene. 1 Si your eh 0 Aa unite ybuz and — there may be nearer Bonds — . you You have permiſſion for your viſit, and then to return as ſoon
as you pleaſe, and acquaint the Greeks with my refuſal, Oreſt. Ex.
Phenix. What ſir, Do you ſend him to the feet of his Miſtrels? | N They ſay he has long ſince had a paſſion for this Princeſs 5 ber. True fir, And what if it ſhould revive, and He ſhould once more render her his heart, and ſhe receive it?
Pyrrhus Let em love Phenix; yes yes, and let em depart. Let em charm each other, and return tO Sparta. I conſent, my Ports are open, and my Fleet ſhall guard em hence.
Phenix. How (ir ?
Pyrrbas. Another time Iwill diſcover to thee more of my ſoul. ſees Andromache appears. Enter
| An dromache * Pyrrbwe.” ls it me, das you ſeek? and may be permitted „ 1 charming ?
Androm. Tam goimg to the place where they guard your pri- ſoner my Son, all that remains to me of my dear Lord; My only Pleaſure now is to weep a moment with him:
1 reer if — 2 oe Lond age, y too much cauſe to withhim.
San „ Why tr, what new anger does peſſeß ert, = * Their hate to tis Father is not yet quenched. mes es they fear his ſon.
Androm. Worthy object of Fear! A poor fem that know not y fs is his Maſter, or He the ſori of Bette: GURTASTI. Io
Pyrr.2w5. What e're he is! the Greeks deal tht Bech up I che jon of Agame mnon is come to [ee their doom execute.
4 l f » === * * 4 — * ” ' v3.6 aol = en * N \ 2 5 * + . ; _ * 2 ** 0 N *
Wo \ ng - : Cy 5 Fo... * „* - . k — * . ” RET
eAndromachs. A Tragedy, »» Androm. And will you pre ſocruels Decree? Is itl chat male him criminal? It is through him that they ſeek to wound me 3 the pretence is againſt him, but the hate to me· FTyrr. Madam, My denyal prevents your tears. The Greeks threaten me with their Arms; and — re our 80 from my jon, they muſt come and e ſand Veſſela. I will defend his life whilſt I enjoy my own. But whilk I run through all theſe perils to ſerve you, will you refuſe me one ſmile : whilſt T am fighting for you, I be (ill
reckon'd n i 1 l
Androm. Ah fir! What do you do? what will Greece ſay uf ou? would: you that a deſign ſo Noble and Generous, ſhould be thought only the tranſport of an amorous mind that could not govern itſelf And can you wiſh that a poor captivealwayy mourning and weary. of her (elf, ſhould trouble You with her Heart: Aud if you had it; what Sewn nay et Heart that — — and ſighing for ſorrows of which you are the Author : N. ä ů mie, to ſave che diſttefled, to reſtore Son to his Mother, and bravely to protect him from the fury of an hundred Nations; and all this without demanding payment of my Heart, are deeds wur- thy of the — —
re. Gods! will your anger be fat. coce iſhing che ſame. crimes
s
for it; yaur eyes have have made The
*
— LT I : - *
ſhall riſe again out of its aſhes, and im much leſ time than. the Greeks ſpent in taking it, I will re- build its walls, and Crown 7 wotrnary Alas : Sir, we are now not at all ambitious of thoſe Gloriesz we promiſed our ſelves theſe things whilſt my Lord ved ; now it is our duty todiſtegard e m. No, you ſacred Wells, who could not preſerve my Lord, ſhall never hope to ſee me more. To leſs favours we pretend. It is exile, nry Tears im _ Permit me, far from the Greeks, and far from you, to ide my Son, and lament my Husband. Mean while do you return to your fair Hermione. & >. | rr. VVhar do you bid me do? mult I offer her a heart, ich you retain ? I know that I by yows have promiſed her Crown; I know, alſo, that ſhe comes hitherto Reign. A erent fate conducted you two, to Epirarz you to be a Cap- mul ih Quern; you to wear ehams, ſhe to impaſe eme Notwithſtanding all this, have I taken any care to ber Þ aa, on the ' contrary. I have changed your deſtimes, placed her Sceprer in your hand, and your Fetters upon her. Alas! one of thoſe ſighs I hourly ſpend in vain for you, ſhe would value above my Crown. L Androm. And why, Sir, ſhould ſhe not ; has ſhe any reaſon #0 be unmimdful of your Services, you have ruin d no Dountry, ſlam no Husband of hers? what did i fay, ſlain no Siusband] Oh fatal thought! ſhe derives her glory from yours, But yours is founded on my ruine: my Husbands death made tyoar Father immortal; and your Father and you are not known, Pye Tis well Mar, Twi forget Hen \ Tis Iwill obey you, fe or ra- aber hate you. Yes, and perhaps, [if relief ay anger no- wing it craves. The Son ſhall anſwer forthe contempt of the gether 7 Greece demands him; I perhaps ſhall not enpoſe my Nory to fave the ingrateful. WI, | 24468 Yo. 242 S eden be muſt die f He has nothing to defend bim, Gar my. ware, and tns 1 The advantage I ſhall gain N ul be ia cohchifion of my life amd: ſourow;-whe pro-
2
3
„ +” — 1 - a * * —
Andromache. A Tragedy. 1 his Father .fromwho@ Heroick ſhade I bave been! abſent in fe with chin ticnce.. | 7 ne Pyrr erhaps in ſeeing; bi your Soul — x ere” take cate how it follows theſe reſentments. - a abt Tr houatyvifit you tro knowthe evencs + 1-156! 22:87 8d — e
Hermione. Cleone.
Herm. ene may foe me. And IaYogract him the pleas _ ſure to let bis Friend eonduct him Bur lte believ'd, 1 would rathet not ſee him Len
Cleo. —— — has he any thing fatal in his preſence. Phe not thetime — — have wiſhed for 4 — times ? — whoſe Jove and coſtncy you e
3 ſt bs this il requited love, which makes his — 1 ſo unwelcom to me 3 What ſhame for tri⸗ 3 — this i a Joel —— diſdamed ? —— 2 den cad ſee GIF at fo high a prive, has e
w Azdionache. A Tae,
cdrom. Ah, Madam! then liſten to owe. has bes gun r — be would . have confefied to me you hate him + *
2 if Imay truſt my heart or no. 4 y, and his bale ingratitude, ſtir me — d dear to me, dim to betray me ſ. And eri levedbim too well, ever to hate him cordially.
Clæon. Then Madam, fly from him. And —
Herm. Ah L prithee give my fury time to grow. a little. Let me get ſome aſſurance againſt my enemy. With horrour I go to ſeparate from him I will be too much to his ſatisfa- ion. The unfaithful man endeayours that too much.
Cleon. What, Madam, will you ſtay for ſome new affront? Love his Captive, and Iove her before your' eyes? cannot all this render him odious? after this what canhe do? If _ can- not duplraſe you, nothing will.
ben Why er cruell Cleone, do chou 8 more ? I am fick enough already with grief and ſhame. I 4bhor, in the condition Lam in, to know — . wb Nordo know what I would have! — tome noth . let wfly | Hy, and leave him to the en — unwor⸗ thy Conqueſt. Leave him to the command of his . Nut! jf the u — — Madame fall e-a7y feet, and implore my pardon—e r aſſume my —— mA, Gods h he mos Iwill ſtay — his fortune, vex his Soul, and. | joe. bim to break his vows to me, — — render hit the more odious to Greece. I have already drawn down their rage on the Son, they ſhall now came and demand the Mother ; ſhe ſhall ſuffer the mae he hs IE en. Bur whillt 1 rave — 11h of the ſne crime to ore ſier. | He knows! — being 9 — W eee td mow
Admit hin Ile ſee bim- 27 11:2 vere UU ctw. Madam be is betey :x! 2 bras.” J did notthink he was ſo nigh}, Anu ef 564-40
IGG 315 3. 2607
AK) - e'Y
A — — = # vin all
pars al for ever ade you; tina, tees, Thave ſworn m,n;
e
my ſteps in this addreſs, are
bluſh at. — Se
kſt parting from yen, that I > yo 6.
_ by by periſhing I might my Oaths, and finiſh. 14 4 barbarous Nations,
PESTS theyhave their Temps
heir on barbarity, 6 choak d their „Ge want of e give em 2 draught of mine. That I am now to ſeck from
e yes. tat death which in all other places flies we- . — — . — ee | zu hopes, and my, foro ig gqngladed. Sen M. l my Sowa victim of which the dcn, bad x6
1 wy . No Sir, think not ur willcake/3Life on which | Il Grew doen 1E it IE! kus n will erecme d
vows of ſo many ſtates y6 JEC&CNt a. nit LNEY ESR SY 0 Fand 1
— not their
no 39 m 0 dg009 dorm wy ;
ET rug a 1 e 247! : $: ö |
N
tu Aber A Tragedy:
Herm. What mean theſe endleſs diſcontents ? will you always believe your ſelf my enemy? It is true, I came into ' my Father ordained it. But who knows that I have not ſecrer ſhared in your ſorraws ? think you, that you alone have deen utifortunare ? that Epirgy has not ſeen me weep | in ſhorts who bas told you, that in 1 of my duty, I have not me- yes. wiſhed to ſee you?
, Wiſhed to ſee me? Divine Princeſs! But, is it to me E. 0 Aae this diſcourſe ? See Madam! Ir is ore e- ſtands be- you] Oreſtes ſd long the object of hate.
Herm. Yes, it is Oreſſe ? whoſe love in the Tnfancy of
my Beauty taugli it firſt ta undetſtand its own power. Oreſter wi many virtues force me to eſteem him; whom I pity, Und whom I would fainloye. © Ofeſt. I underſtand you Madam ! I perceive what falls to my eure Eb has your heart, and Oreſtes your wiſhes. i Ah! deſire not the deſtiny ech. I ſnould hate 1 You ſhould love me more, you would look on me with — to what _ — — — — to you. Love W- ͤ e it (elf > would love me (ety you wiſhed to hate 2 — Jury r Teaſbn to hate me ! —— bis Soul furprim d by other — Herm. How Sir | who has told you he hates me? have mu
teatntic from his his A od think 2 | EEE 2 or 1 y
PR 61 — "OE y {61F! It may
A dure habe Dre
QF N.
2 power of your bea Aich f kevwaked — Ah Wat for on ns ; mannet that 'T d6. 2 |
Av * | A 8 * a : p * O 07 3:1 7 to ade 36G 115557 1
--
* = * * LS. - IL Heres. a p
Andreniche. -ATragedy. ng Herm · Tam nor concerned what he does His hate or kind-
neſs import me 0 G Rebe
—__ the reward of his R er Re *
fires, and let e m make Epirus a ſecond J On ed
fay I Love! — oref. Madam, if you love not, do more, and. ge den ar eyes
Will you remain in this place a Hoſtage? Gaz; and. excite all hearts, and provokee'm to an Herme. In the mean while he ſhall marry a Tj Wi, ore. Hal abe N im. Conſider what a diſgrace i will be forns Ke ian {ball be his Bride ? / Oreſt. Ts this your hate? Ah! Madam, Love une a « foo ther can be fuppreſicd in the Soul: Every thing E $u2 Silence, our Looks, meen nd the il 40 but appear the plainer. 3 ob, "hog Sir, I perceive your ray judiced mind PT: is falle colours on all my diſcourſe. It ſeeks 12 my reaſum to cavil at; and believes that even my very hatred is an of Love. Inſt then explain my ſelf. Tou know in this duty both conducts and retains me; I cannot or part; oa: unleſs my Father, or Fyrrbes conſtrain me 1 | my Fathers name, and make him underſtand, 7 e of of the Oreck canmot be the eb 25 on theTroj 2 wo oy ctr meet of Een, | —— I ant ready rofl oed. Then e eee debe nest Wu
an 3 Waits not but for GE bg he ml 0
* iT 4. ee ee 71 0 4 * " "* 1 f. e 1 54 by . . een, N . — — : - 4+ | * 8 5 3 WY 75 2 edt 22 N. 3 . * - o 4 I * oh 1253 #32 Yd PEO mr, 6 e
*2/7E U N . N 1 673 "T7 oy J £25 1629 8 7 . of 1 *
SSM . yo # | a * * 5 — PO Ye $24 L 3 : , WIS . "IT .
ASE
16 inen ATragedy
breeds Phenix. Attendants Guards
are z 145 abt to Eck A etl violence- on Soul, made me for a time reſiſt * of your reaſons 2
fince have ted with my RIF and find the equity of em. 1 confider now with you, har T ſhould ar ace all Greete, my Fathers 'ſkcred" thiemory, and my (el, if I re-build Troy, And #6tidet af that thy Father WARE have done imperfet deen kel tit condemn yhe jt Tanger of the Greeks, no, Sir, I wil
Oreſt. Sir, by this Nome rudent, but orous, you bu . 3 * N en * it 5 1 0 ſhall be the gage
peade. I will marry her appy ſpectache ſeem 5 — attended till now, to have fo noble 2 wee of it as
in this place: ou here repreſent all the Greeks, and her ather. Go viſit ber then, end tell her that to morrow, Iex- — receive with the Peace, the fair Hermione from your
ore ART Gods? — | | Hi. Now, Phenix, does ove povern me or not? dat thou 785 $6, Naw ow d the erth has reſtored you ou, an at tothe Greeks, . youre. Who e noble » CO ur age
ws, can CO 5 —.—
Fyrr. r ws bags SEE dy 2 ſaweſt before ſo overthr
Auen ATragedy, 1
forget all. [ took pleaſure vanes fare omoand Love.
rhe.” Tblefs, Sir, PI Ay a, 7 — 2 pr Thou laweſt how ſhe treared me. 1 be eng be tenderneis alarm d, that pity ty for her Son would have /difarmed her ſeverity. I went to ſee the ſucceſs of thoſe — and — 6. but tears mixed with violet reſentmenm 3 her | ihe This
ſharpned her more ; and eternally — 3 times in her mouth. would ſhe ſay (embracing the Child) This is Heffor, ſee his eyes, his mouth, and already his courage | — "ris thee my Lord I embrace. Fond Woman does ſhe think I will the poyſon which feeds her Love!
— You buy her ingratitude dear
- 1 know- what flatters ber. Her beauty aſſures her,
an Cn foite of my her pride expects to ſee me yet at her feet, when, Phenix Serie 1 d ſee her with a re- gardleſs eye at mine, ſhe ſhe is the Widow of He&or, I am the Son of 2 and thats enough to ſeparate re py Andro- Nac
Phe. Diſcourſe, Sir, then no more. So \ fre Heranian, and ' diſpoſe her your ſelf to the Marriage. 2 — to your Rival He loyes her too |
Pyrr. I will, eee doſt t ry her, Audramac be would not ye a ſecret
' Yi G f * — * 8 1 4 ' 4 1 4 cs 0 5 1 2 x . : how "YA u words * e . OY D>*, 6 2 ow 1250 | . * * 4 8 | 1 1 4 lach ö , * — as - 2 nd d o ” 1 *
beer to beste
48 Andromache. A Tragedy. 0 | Phe. You love, Sir; that's enough.
Pyrr. I love an ingrateful woman, who hates me the = loving her. One without kindred, friends, hope, ur 11 ſup- port but me? a ſtranger, I may ſay a ſlave in;Epiras : I beſtow on her, her Son, my Soul, my Empire, and cannot gain in ber heart any rank but that of a perſecuter; I have ſworn my ven- 1 reſolyed l I will now j her hate, Hill abandon her Son: Let her weep, and call me by what name ſhe pleaſe: this ſigh is the laſt ſmoak of ancxtingache Love. Come, Phq- ix, I reſign nry ſelf to thy Councels. I will deliver the Tro- ju, and goſoe Hermon. 11 2 Itteieemy VOWS, ada! Ipronifed pay,
And at her feet this ny Cognos BY:
"ACT Hl.
Enter Oreftes and Dold,
5 Mere bir, bis enten rage 3 iy cho Ahr I
ſcarce know ¹ You are not your MW. ; by” No, no, Thy Councels are a unſeaſonal le, I ant wea- 'ryof hearknit dere en lc is to (pi RCTS y hie and
on, 11 | Ci: $35 N Pd Well. Sis ſeize her, — vs 56. Peron
mean while where you are. Conceal this refilels exe the ſecret m breaſt. Thoſe-Quards, this the very Air, all in ꝓyrrbes, and more on Ay rags from her . Gods! why would you have her in ths . OreiF. What know 1? was I then maſter of my ff? -fuly
— and Feame to threaten the man and her Lover. — ERS Pre
$4 k . ©% 1 - - Y 1 * 2 ” 0 p = o 1
2 ”
— 2 wh * =  & i
Andromiche. A Tagedy. 19 'Pflad:: Andwhat would be the fruit ol that >- Ti; Toner Oreli. What Soul would not be ſtum d and loſt to reaſon that
ſhould receive ſuch a blow. He tells me, that he would t
Hermiont to morrow ; and the more to honour me he would re-
ceive her from my hand Rather let my hand be dptin theblond!
of the Barburiax / — 2nd Pylad. You accuſe him Sir forthis cro(s deſtiny, when pechapy
4 with his. own deſigns, he „n as T
tudes as Uαÿu.
No, no, I know him, m difpeix makes b.
he would ſcorn her, but that he finds [love her, her cif
then never moved him. The perverſe only ſeeks” to
ſnatch her from me: Theinſtanttoo, when her heart was yield- ing, and I had gain d her to fly from his fight for ever. Con» fus d betwixt love and ſpite, ſhe waited but for one, the leaſt; even an appearance of a refuſal, Soul on te tall v4 eyes began to open Hader Her to liſten, WP mented. with oreſſer : one word had finiſhed all. 2 Do you believe her-? — Why not? her heart enraged againſt the i Ah Sir! her heart was never more bis you; beurer i, leds de had not framed to ſtay her? Leave theſe deceits; and inſtead of of burdening your ſelf with her, 1 you ſteal tor- ment, rune fury char will ber you nn
ing you in a paintul ſuſpence. .
oreſt. Fos this-very "reaſdn 1-would- force her: bene 3d
let my revenge languiſn in Ait, and the world laugh nt m
vam rage! fly from her, and endeavour io her ? no, ſhe
ſhall now take her turn to fear me. Condemned to eternal tears,
— humane, anne given
Is
*
FF
7 - n a
Andromache. A Tragedy. nocence. I know not the reaſon, but ſome unjuſt power bath
— — and — — Whieh
way foever I tum my eyes, I ſee nothing
for me by the Gods. I will deferve her anger Julie hel 4
hate, and let ſome bold crime precede my pum |
But thou, ſeduced by Friendbip, ew) pune thou 1 ſtand under. ————— anger on thy felf, which only ſeeks me?
y from a wretch, deſert a criminal. Dear Pylader, believe me, my own ſorrow ſuffices me, without increaſing it by thine. Leave to me thoſe perils of which I only expect the advantage. And do thou bear to the Greer the Infant Pyrrhav now abandons to me. Go dear Pylades.
Tylad. Les Sir, ſet us go, and with us Herarione. Greatniinds delight in danger. What cannot friendſhip do, conducted — Love? Let us go prepare the courages of our Greeks. Veſſels are ready, and the Wind calls usʒ — 1 the Palace; and you ce the Sea joyns to the Walls.
night, without any dithculty, by a ſecret way we will con- duct the rich Prey to your Veſſel: | -- Oreft. Brave friend, I abuſè thy too much friendſhip: But pardon the ills which thou doſt pity. Excuſe a wretch who ldles all that he loves, whom the whole world hates, and who even — What ſhall not I do; when it is my turn to be
K * Diſſemble Sir, is all I deſire of you. See that the de- 1 blaze not out before the time. Forget a while that Hermione that you Love. Bur ſee ſhe comes - ere Gao, do rens, for her, and I will for my ſelf. | er
20
—
Enter Ses Cleone.
„dove. . bag,
[have ſeen P —— our Marriage is L *rarſ} 0 20 « more, 2 ny we * — "T4 4b nale ent Eon eee Deut 407; Angily bat
on | 8 Herne.
Aukromghe. ATragedy,, 21
Heres. Who could have believed that pyrebus That 5 e
ſome are noe ſenſible of  fcliciry they may polleſs, a that he Bw;
near loſing it. But I would believe with you, Greece, that he is leadrather by intereſt then inclination; my eyes reign mor tely over your Soul then his. oreſt. No, Madam, he loves you, I do not doubt. Do not
our eyes, Madam, do hat they pleaſe > and are norvery NES to . leaſe him. aus you
ball do, uu Faith is promiſed? Love Rs b 452 obey is all that is left us, yet you ſec how 3 * for
your ſake.
ore. Ahl You know too welll cruell/ — But every one may at their choice diſpoſẽ of. their own Soul. yours is at your on command, —1 Kod" . have beſtowed it on him, without 1 But why do I trouble you with my vain compla e 155 to have uſed me otherwiſe; Lough 10 ue you ſad 2 ä
tertainment.
Herm. Didſt then expeſt from bi cle.
e The che of he ob is ge {pit W oy Cle car. ty: him, au more, bent he is the E his owrl = For cons
ler, Madaay, face when this. mighty, page. as prongR, in
W 2 », Doſt_thou nl,
kar, Þ e h. :
who Pyryhay is kaſd af en up exploits 3 but who can number e'm ? Fearleſs, atrended E r —— — noching a
is Androniuche. AT | Cle. Hold Madam. — Diffembie à While, — yomr rival all in tears, comes without doubt to weep at your feet. — Herm. Gods! I cannot forſake my joy to entertain her. Let ge. '1 kaye nothing to ſay to her. + i cen
„ e Enter Andronache, Cepbiſe.
— Whither ay 4x flie Madam? Is it not a Spectacle ꝑleaſant enough, to . 1 wor he Hector Zor weeping at your: _— —_ ——＋. ferrets to envy you
N Per 768955 Alas ! I have 1920 IMs nch could deer Fo rity reg, pierced b ge of his Father. All my love is. encloſed in HeGorr
et there remains to mie his Son. You, Madam, wil ee ee Dve of a So is. But you will not cee em vba may not, in whar mortal trouble his
L of 10 many fefiericy which once flat- — he is all chat rertiains, and they would' take him from me. © Alas? when enraged by ten yeats miſery, the Trojans rhjearned your Mother, Hector often procured her ſafety. You rel 1 1 over .
STS Infant to be feared? Let me here he ſhall fly ac Gs Yager to
FYQ an 3t) . bor ud aniftere! duty,
#14
. _- g 9 Os; Ly 2 o + 1 * 74 4
1 2 * OP Fg vil; 0.4 Y 611 1 $3 vic. 10. 7. 1255 At” Wo. 77 0 d vodT ei va exe} 8 da ue Dns An 5 mom's 1 no other 39d d 221049x9 21 o 20G naidaon a206) ui n gms ,f 2 —
"OT Eck. 4B d- Ei de & e. ee,
P „ e did du not a) ſhe was walkingis wels b ardens?. © ,
Phe. 1 Androm... Sec, 4 hiſe, the 1 2 pf = Fr ale + gards me not. Pyr. What ſays we Phenix 3 Andrape. Alas! all forſake me. Phe. Come Sir, let us ſcek Hermione 5 cepb. What, Madam, de Jou wait for? = ih » ing Silence. 3 2 5 gm. me 105 Son. | Ce ut has not rme promiſe. — 4 he has reſolyed bis ane 1 yr. See it in ee e JE pos he
2 My difrders hi a Jet vs Pyrr. Yes, 2 57 who Androm. Foy 8 ul deliver 4 2875 et other me that 4 Vagy Pyre. pf HIT my WG och Ga Zed... Androml Is this wenne r my fake,
# #4
12 75 * 5 of Rg a, gelign 7
dangers?
ſhade. REPO n : A aw, * ck 1 8 AY *
bebe TOW
1 e Y Th .
24 ' Andromache. R Tragedy. Walk demoliſhed, my whole Family ſlain, my Husband pale and ory dr rough the duſt; and ad wow: his Son — wich c, is reſerved for Chains. It was ſame comfort to me once, that hive, and not elſewhere, my. deſtiny threw me: bar ox our miſery, that ſince the Son of 16 — e es | rye; he was fallen under your believed bs Pri Pri- " Tori ould have proved bare Comqu —ͤ— once found reſpect from Achilles, I expected more g from his Son. Pardon, dear He&or / my credulity, 2 d not ſuſpect thy enemy of a crime. I would compell him to mous ainſt his nature. I will ſoon Heck repoſe at.” hy. and cke end his hate, and ul tiſeries- 2 Pyrr. Phenix attend me without. Re alc Exit. Madam ftay —— I can yet render Jnr ou the Jon you la- ment. Yes, I perceive with regretz tears, I give you arms againſt me that will ſubdue aeg, Idee to have bronghit hither more hate. Madam, turn, turn your eyes upon me. See if my looks diſcover the ſeverity of a 1 or the hate of an enemy that ſeeks your ruine. Why, Ma will you force me to betray you: In the name e fem Son 'ceafe to hate me. Save him, tis I that beg it of you, Muſt I with ſighs crave his Life of yonꝰ once more ec I toy you ſave him. — know what atis I break to wear your Chains, what hate Hoe upon my ſelf! 1 will Tend back — with Blufhes of a Ctoven. I wilt conduct you to that Temple where her Marriage is waiting, and compaſs your Brow with that Dia- dew, is Be This an riſes do nice to bo diſ- e ee he yea wn Th N © longer on ySoul, ti '« years itigratitude, att | 1 — y, I die if I loſe you, aud ae wait Con-
— Se ou, andibll ſoon re N wurn folegd Rr
—— mou
yd e ler, e fo Tanabete *
| So, Madam, did 1 2 r eee ** dee iy yet be er Mor pate ic <2
C 1 R 1 Dun. H, alla
CA *
- = Andrew. 2 8 - "of? : -
= * -%
. — N , .
* a 6 . - — * * . 0 4 =
25 Ajdromiche. A T T happy. Marrizge:ibs bar te thee; fthew.t8 "IA
— the — wow ci the nl ke " rh) pee If I have ne inn faut Sade e — ther for the dearth « . er con
= — — . york But — Whi 0
425 hard as MCL, | — wb rh Kaätute == well; brd oe Ar ee of
DES b . 4 clom AST „S n. | Fuchs t 20G ανi¹ν,g Que q b any;
=» | ch Ashes bf 2 25 70 Courſtr ather 15 605 285 _ 1 bo heh
* 4 * 194 —. — — „
18 4 IT. ih nt We Ys AET. IV: 1689
(ee
2 baer Andromeche, C le.
Ge. ATinedr.
i W 11 te ?_Alr I. th A . . ' i t "SLA, 4 N. vor SON tr os
Nc 15 Ale fn
| HI a ES £75 5 Ker. dexpole him, hazards himſe
LY De ores — er .
er
vallalage,t N view 5 rag up t e Sol of f a Andro. Cephiſe, Df ls key ul eve in. 2 fl
Cepb. «Chet fa - ! Cephi Es 2 15 miſery has ſul e 105 y it
Androm. Soul, (59; t og Andro a 1 — 9 N
Ka ! Ferse +
violent, but ee 55 promiſed. | Ono + che
4 of 180 Gree H remade of - 15 to Fyrr 9 Ft 0 „the Altar, an y immorta ties. — 1 to;bim, ſhall finiſh = remainder of my u ore me to an firſt and Jour hd my,
ot ps e
SY my me, and of my dear Son, SOT TEE many Kings thou! 'Qoſt ſerve and oblige
him in mind of his promiſed Faith; 5d if 0 enger el
ſometimes. tik of me. Make Him Fim I was once before my death bis ʒ that his reſeutments ought Il. to be effaced, and that I ſhew my eſtcem of him in leaving him my Son. And to my Son, 3 05 ou recount all the Heroes * his: race. Conduct him (28. much as thou art able) in their e W Te er him by what exploits their names have ſhone,
What they have been, but more what they have done. Speak 'often to 1 of the virtues of his Heraick Father, and fometimes hame his Mother, But let him not think. Cephiſe to reyenge us. We leave him to a Naſter, who maſt rule him. Let him have a modeſt remembrance of his Anceſtours. He is of the blond of Heclor, but is all that remains of i it ä
WM Whichtopreſerye . did we
Igel my bate, fy like Sy; e. | cepb. Alas! 8
Andro. Some ate als iis way. "Hide thy Tears co
and now remember the fate of Andromache is repoſed in thee.
It is Hermione > Let us fly her fury. Exit-
by Enter Herwdove, eta.
 "'Cleon. Madans, al. me leave to e eter not this cruel your
peace this _ c alfa ? ou who & at the ver 7, name n who | | diſp an e hat Pyrrbav honour her ard? — and v
ET
your eyes may a ſelves of their power over NN baer
Enter often.
oreſt. 1s it true, Madam, that Oreifer ſhall once have che ho- nour to be commanded by you? Have they nor flatter d me with a falſe hope > Tre you. d for my preſence? yt pen that . kerne
Herm. Si b # you. real in che caltion. you
pretend, if indeed
Oreſt. if lLovel Go Gods!. my oaths, perjuries, my liche, my return, my reſpects, m e % . are vam. ir 0 What witneſſes with youcan credit n a 1. 4 Herm. Ido believe e m. — revenge me. Oreſt. Madam I go, And will got ll Grave eee Sig- nalizing my Aim, a9 your Name, let ws a ome Re plags, You of Helene, and I of Agamemmon. ... ME The miſeries Trey Ile copy ere | And I this Inſtant will in Arms Tos add Herm. No, Sir, ſtay. A I will not carry þ> fir of my wrong '1 My ſhame, nor tarry for re a 5 Icrown my Enemies both heal Whilſt Cow pac't N dach. 05 I N
bo-
6 > © 0 Run 7568 125 W. 4 Oreſs. 2 wh BE fe
8 oreft, 2, P;rrhas, Madam |
BP Angers A Tragedy, A e gone pare Jangull * red end. da por — 11 ſhall TSH fr9 * e r you ue Ngins Wan I have reſolved revenge, and he ſhall dye, Tis not for you his deeds to juſtifie. oreſt. I juſtiſie him: Tour bonntitstoo him have long ſince
d engraven his crimes in my Sul. No, let us revenge our cen 1 Wa 2 2% * oft 05 eel e! 9851 * 177 Yome'noÞler way would cauſe his fate, A be his Fec, trot bis Allaffinate; © I would make his ruine, and our victory juſt what to the Greeks 955 rrh#s an{ver, ſhall I beat his head ? | Have I Hot Een upon the tfe Kare of all the eſtates, and ſhall outs 3 "PIES wy —— — gn Ma in thename the'Gods, that Greece explain her ſelk. If he muſtcæeẽ 21.839 / h 2248 111 T7. Under the hatred let him bow, REmember wat Crown ſurtounds his brow? — nem What! E it not enough chat I condemn him ? That my offended 6 glory Joes demand, A mighty Victim more tha
im more that Hermione Is the reward and price of a flain Tyrant Ay N x bat once 0X0 ove | T hide it no: Tt itigrareful pleds'd me once. e ene ee, vowelb ſhamefully deceived f
Atdvonuehe. A Tragedy). it I ſearce am trrived 1e and liv Tit 2 over»
You el 5 6585 Ae a tt .
A day, an 1 '4 minute, edel
In all his Peoples fi nt too muſt be
Let EEE Ne Lask no more, L mean while 8 Confile the time fn Ro — Mk The Deed ho 6hge are e.
Her. Mean while he — to day. Her N . ple. Wa ar 2
bat wait you for ?' he * 4 Without . Okards Ke handle N Thoſe he hab r eee 2 igt, 5 Stript / " Now duke _
What ſpite of hitn, end Arm all — Greeks, and all my 2
Be gone; ad Bont 90 * : | Lene tomy ef ere of my revenge! |
AE ' — - F 442+ 1 " # —
37
Andromache, A Tragedy.
eee 3 id deſornd vo wh. your”. e
My (elf alone will to the Temple goz u. j ©; ;..;
Where hoy the {plendid Marriage now re And do, what you to merit me, hot dare, There my falſe enemy I will approach,
And ſeize that heart my beauty could not touch- My bloudy hands — my — ſhall ſeine, And ſpite 5 Mah e IP Ingrateful, though he is, more ſweet will be, To die 1 then ta ſurvive irh che.
ore ſt. No
Iwill de ,you of ihn faral [+= wal or He ſhall n he tacky ee
No hand but mine ſhall ſacrifice your enemies. You, if if you pla, ſhall own ah mt But let me ow, reflect upon my miſery. _ How wretched. in my ha am I.
Who envy ane, oondemm ꝗᷓ by you to die?
Herne. 1415 , and leave your fortune to my care, your Veſiels
clean, Ah]: Madam, You bring ruine on 0 2 2
fox our Nele N Exit. *
Herm. Let me be ruimed,
Nor know I, if for this great action, 1 Deere 0
is not e ene. 41 Rn eons e ——\
<Andromache. A Tragedy, "
"Cheom Madam ! Irun! but ha who do ſee,
Ohl Gods! who would believe! Madam the King! —
Herm. Oh! run after 0reftes, Cleone —— and charge hini he undertake 8 till he ſees me again Cleo. Exit.
Enter Pyrrhus and Phonic,
Tyr. Madam you did not expect me,
And I perceive Iam a trouble toyou.
I come not hither armed by any unworthy Arts, With veils of cquity to hide my crime..
Let it ſuffice my: heart in ſecret does condemn me. But I will on the truth I am preparing TRAY the fair Trojan, tis too true
Ive promiſe hr the fab vowed to you. Herm. | Gods! [. aſide.
Pzrr. Others would plead, that iy the Trojan fields,
Our Fathers — bonds without our knowledge Never conſulting or your heart or mine,
Without our loves —5 did our perſons joyne.
But tis enough that I —_— —
And by — ado my heart;
And to the Marriage my 2 proclaim,
And fo with them into Epire you came, a
Hera. The inſolence of this ingrateful Tyrant! [aſide
Pyrr. And though
Who gives me to my face aftronts ſo rude,
And * my I-his Love purſu d.
htneſs of another eye Stopt of the S ater ſucceſs of 5 1 Tet thoſe new charms did not much progreſs gain, But ſpite of em Idid my faith retain.
Treat you as Queen, and tillthis hour I ſtrove
To ate mathe ve inſtead of Love ·
But this ne Love has now my faith ſuppreſt
eee rakes - oe — lar docs deteſt. 5 an chers, 35% 8
In immortal Love we ſhare. voi
34 Andromache. A Tragedy.
Herm. How boldly doesthis man relate his faſnaod —f| ale. yr. Now after this do not a Traytour ſpare, Who grieves he is ſo, yet cannot forbear. I never will reſtrain a rage ſo due, Perhaps it will caſe me as 2 ag you, Call me all names to perjur d men belong, I fear your Silence rather then | Herm. In this addteſs from arnifice ſo free, Im pleaſtd to ſee you do your (elf ſuch juſtice. Since in ſuch ſolemn perjury you fall, Tou do act falſbood like a orimireill. How fuch a conquerour ſo ſervile grow To pay the duty he his Faith — ca * No, no, his Ealthood does too pleaſing ſdem, And he from perjury e ——.— eſteem: — The Storm (as I daſir d) begins to riſe·— ade. erm Great minds ſcorn little erimes— \'/ Tis brave, no Oaths ot duty to retain, To love a Trojan, and a Greek diſdain For Hector: Widow, Helens Daughter (hun,. And ſacrifice all Greece to Heffors This ſuews in you a heart ſtill free and brave, — . 3 Own vows — | o pleaſe i wi Of the 1 ctimesof'T — Your mighty heart, laden with honour, longs,
In her fair arms, my carte ee. C4 [ 4 4
Dr. How pleaſing to my ears theſe
The jarring ſounds increaſe my harmony Herm. But this 19 too much Glory come dy oh _ Without deriving titles from m
What you enjoyed before — e.
He whoſe'great valout Nate, Father ſlew,
 Andjomache.. A Tragedy.
35
Though all the Greeks diſpleas d at him were by! —
What can a heart to ſuch great deeds deny >
rr. Madam, Iknow to what exceſs of rage,
The ardour to revenge you did tranſport me. I may blame you for all the bloud I But I'm contented to forget what's paſt.
Thank Heaven your indifference does remove,
All ſort of guilt frommy new happy Love. My heart I fee too apt to be decerv'd, Muſt better ſtudy, and examine yours.
My vam remorſe has done you mortal wrong!
To be unfaithfulI muſt ſirſt be lov d ;
But you defire not I your Chains ſhould wear, | al fear of fallbood I may fpare.
I ſerve you moſt, hen moſt you are betray d, For we were never foreach other made. Ifollow my defires, as you do yours;
Vour inte love, —— Herm. My Ittle love Have Inot loy'dthee? what have I done then?
Did I not for thee diſdam. I — — Provinces. © And too much neglected when I came, I Still 1 dying flame,
Did gh, ao — Soul appeaſe, e g gert unkindacfſes. ay; — all — who ſham d to ſee,
My Love requited with ſuch injury, Did wi — and rage — burn, Whom yet I charg'd to walt thy hearts return.
It was too noble to be aalen If not, then to forgive and hide m y wrong.
Not love, ant gtr >. "an car 0 moment.
Thou cast ſo peaceably pronounce my death.
aring if my band my bloud ſhould ſpill, BY + hrs l G ts 0 love thee ſtill Say wy prey oi
F 2
Free
—
36 Andromache. A Tragedy.
To pityI begin | [ aſide. "Vert — afraid all ſtill purſue my fin, 4 Herm. Well, if it muſt be, Sir, if Heaven in anger a
For other eyes the glory to 2 you. Proceed, my free conſent, Sir, I proclaim, But do not . my eyes to ſee my ſhame. Perhaps I ne re ſhall talk with you again, Defer your Marriage but one * . morrow, You ſhall be your own Maſter Wilt thou not anſwer me 2 F alle. Ma Man, I ſee, Thou count ſt all moments thou doſt loſe with me. Impatient to reviſit thy. fair Trojans Thou ſuffereſt my diſcourſes with pegret,,. Thy heart now talks with her, thy eyes now ſeek her Be gone — I ſtay thee not — go, perjur d be, Go ſwear to her, the faith thou (wor ſrrome! The Majeſty of all the Gods Thoſe Gods, juſt Gods, who memory retain; Of all thoſe Oaths, by which thy thy Soul is bound, Firmly to me Go bear to Altars Croun d. The heart that now abandons me But fear, To find enraged Hermione there. Exit. Phe. Yau unde her, Sir, flight not her anger. One mad — nage, — mt She — Sir, has too many followers. The Greeks have joyn'd their quarrel too with hers —— — — loves her yet —— and at the price. | Perhaps. | Fyrr. No more, ab attends me My heart to other cares will not be won | Ce place inn Exih.
- "4 T4 . Fi : Ke h z £ * * , 4 " — , - " * * * : * * - * bl N - * * . :
ane . regen, 37
Len !:
The laſt ACT... — Hermione alone.
18e > what hav Tdone? — ſhalll do? Oh |! my:tranſþorts! ſorrowand rage devour me Iraving, winks round the mournful rooms, ;
And do not know whither ! go, orwhy 3
I ſcarce can tell yet if I love br hate
How coldly did the cruel Man take .
He would not the leaſt "of pity own,”
I could not draw from hi A
| Dumb co my fyghs,: B Diſturb d the Naſtʒ nor to regird one tra?
Nor would to give m Kull rehct,
So much ascounterfeit a little grief. And yet I piry him !— my heart=—— baſe heart | —= His danger fears, and yet will take His part! Frremble ar the blo that is ſonsar, - Would fave him yet, and my own v be fear:
No —my juſt ſentenoe I will not
Lethim iraght peri — ex htm ee the tre!
I no controll will to my vengeance give.
He dyes . firice he no more for me will ive.
My ra age he roms e And chinksthe Stor wil ta Wr
I ean Lo cruel prove 2 And ſhall his death be the — Love ?
38
 Cleon.
Herm.
leon.
Andromache. A Tragedy.
His death to whom l paid ſuch, regard,
Whoſe brave exploits I've with ſugh pleaſure heard.
To whommy Soul was long in ſecret joyn d,
Before our fatal . was deſigu d
For whom ve travers Lands and Seas,
And was I hither ſent by "def
7 aſſaſſine — murder him! —— Oh! ere he dyes! —
But ſee Cleone! ahl what have done?
What doſt thou come tc tell me ? where i _ :
What does he mean? | : | |
Madam o'rewhelin'd with pleaſure.
The fierceſt and the melt inflam d of Men
He's leading now in Triumph towards che T
Like a great his beautious
And marching in his mouting 2
Even drunk with Love, goes with delight.
She humbly Captive = accepts 4 |
Appears indifferent in her love and hate,
No ſenie of ſorrow, or of joy —
All Cakn and mild, ber Comquerours — —
And does th — — far?
But oh ciaone / didſt thou mind is looks?
Does he no trouble in his Soul diſplay ?
Did he not turn his eyes ſometimes this way ?
Sigh, Bluſh, — his falhood ,, Seem to — evo gd To one chathovorbiniſO«——-" e Il could not fing „ Wh
That he ee
Even his on ſafety, and h gr yt 4 99 as muck as 6 $11.4 Not werbe Fu Zen, „ #7
Hot in of te eld id WAL kita — e
His dangere does poſes his though der
2112 262 21 5$169b erg lar ba
Herm. Cleon. Herm. Clæou. Herm.
Toa
Poſſeſſes him
He des what ſuys oe wa: oil] uns |
„ dt the Temple. is he not preparing to I74
7 EPR yrs 431 e *
Know not? will he then betray me?
Oreſtes falſe tot Cleon- Madam, he adores yow mii (it -!i/.1” 6
Argramacld. A Tragedy. By 22 order Phenix ha's conveigh'd him
— Templetoo = WY al _
59
44644 I:, 4
4 = TY
1
49 Andale A Tragedy.
1K
Trumpet gan, 0 Bout] of” People.
Heark! heark! The Train js entring cape. che. Temple. The . rebound Fram chende W my —_— I fin 17935. I only muſt do juſtice to my ſe Ile fill the Temple with another ty, And ſoon diſturb their fatal Marrians 5 joy. Nor will I ſtay to chuſe Teas 7, 56.21 l a declare, a f 1 ry Will: Oreffes (pate: ; |
1 le dye. when Imy.rage bent ſhown,
And taken care I may * — n Exil. 654 wrath br; Ass
The Scene. - 4A Taweple-> Enter Gelee. the Greeks t bood ei nag. 0 OreF?. Prepar'd in eee bete — I: 9h b. the Greeks 1. Greek, Take no carte, | The enemy,of Crete ve vil bot hee. n | edu aid 394 390089 WOE. Zu, 5-1 The Greek eee, e Textyle: ! blots. tr ic 22122097 (1! In 04 A moon Pry va Eee nba eee 'Cephiſe, Laaies fs Ui 246. 2 — — feat 3bemſehver in Tone
8 G m ME ce
Come all — i eg SUM ont That wait ex LM 1 10 0 rays 171 tay > That whet his ſhafts, ee prepares cs. 2 1: bs \ ©
Te altive Miniiters of ſweeteſt Jager 3) 41 oilgo 17 1 15 04 Come now and teuer in this facred hlace ; 3a 74 This bappy hour, loves mighty T, rinmph grace.
| Ctrovigche; A Tragedy
See, ſee! 2 and rey esta their 8
E — 5 — ſiour minute —— 4 Jear. End, end dull Prigits Jour, duller M — hs Diſpatch the Gods aid Love. |
Go ſend e'm back to their nl Heeven math ſed. | In a full ch
Come let the flames the Gin Feaſt al the Gods and Goddeſſes. we in pure Devotion Not Gods that. 5 We kindly let your Altars ſmoak, But it 5s Love we moil.invoke- In Love am Hymens name the Eechoes TING, N Jo. Hymen, Hymen, Fill we Jo. Hymen, Hymeneæ, Jo. Hymen.
Oreſt. Whi imperious Love dolt thou tranſſ me? N E e 1 And ſcems my preſence not at all to fed.
It — -eoes excite his boldneſs mote,
He braves all Greece in their DER, |
Pyrrhu Rely Pike 22 s . **
Tyrrbu. Recrive ay Crown —= gy . 13. With it a Faith th: all talk death Now o're g yrs 6g 25 7 mr, | I promile tg he att ] Ys Th X h 0 2 ; 2. $ Wes 9 21 r ö And all his ch 1 55 2 a 14-bi 6 4 1
ſeixe,
0 77 e . 0 at
42 Anuromacbe. A Tragedy
All the Greeks run with 4 great ont from vhe ſeveral part of the Temple where they were diſperit, and V Pyrrhus at the Altar:
oreſt. See with what hunger to the prey they go, I not the favonr gain to give dne bu Wm. Their lawleſs fury does my guilt prevent, . And with their zeal they keep me innocent. How I have kept my prommife no Ile ſhew, To my fair Miſtriſs with this preſent go. With it this Gaptive—= :: 1. Greek. —— rather hale em henee; | Aboard the Fleet, and (hew em round in Triumph, Io all the offended States of injur d Greece.
The Greeks drag g the body Pyrrb ot ef the Teng: "one way, whilſt Oreſtes another, is going out wi Andt e; but
mel Hermione, whoenters with a nakgd Poryard is ber hand.
Oreſt. Madam tis d . eee
*
*
MTV let us fly with haſt, .... uf f + | Gi
6f” Your rente dt dne tf: Aboard my Flat — (kt Madam this your Captive,
HowThaye kept my fich, can now acquaint you. Better then I—— e AIG 7 | L Herm. Oh | Gödsf Anidroneache F== = ©
Androm. Yes tis this Princels, who is twice a Wigdow,, .. 3 A e BADIge de, büßt who (hall ks 2"
At your own Sparta rave you afl, Since from your cruelty my gon is ſafe. For! I
SF P'S:
; Kr 5 5 f r "3/4 HOARY : Lhd : . bY « 2 on ul ought have ' C m 7 HT * - = - ” 4 . p V » 4 - 37\ Gas * - : (4 4 4
12
Heym. Oreſſ.
Herm. What ba ve
— . — 2 —
n A og
And fa — Eyes a: de dig her ER % n For any hut my hm Fa ay; now. — .
— a bloudy Way — i 1 To blot a while dis memory from my ind. | | More barbarous then Achilles. or hi den.
You by this deed; have all their erirnts qut · dont l
And anew way of cruelty have ehaſe,, »
You make me here lament my greataſt Foes. | Why Madam, for what crime did Pyrrbar dyed I more then you his cruelty did try:
His Tyrant Love my honour did invade,
And me unfaithful to my-Hugband made.
Yetſtead of bloud, bk Ldidoppenr, « I could not make it coſt him but a Tear, ©
How then is Pyrrhas dead > Madam, our Greek ——,_ ,
"
Th' unfaithful Prince . al —
And ſtrove whole hand ſhould thedcadly wound.. Each did the glory to his —
Wbilſt all-comtending left no room for nine.
A while he ſtrove Auen 11907014: A
But ſtreight before the Altar fell, and ſum d-
That place with bloudt his falſhaod had profan'd.”
She have ſav d, our Iriumrh tocompleat, ¶ ſbewing An- Now do our Fleet let us with ſperd * N 1 lderoche Our vahant Friends . al
All coverid winhthe loud Lpromjs'd ay, 0
Our perſons heute in ſaſety to og \
they done? n 2079
Oreſt. Forgive their 8 *
I find wengwance half rr d. . Fee silit by —— was made?
' When dynig, — Ears — . ö
But what they did, þ lead. eon to do. 8
G 2
44
Herm.
Ore N.
Herm.
Andromache. A Tragedy.
You may the vengeance to your ſelf aſſume;
The Gieeky did onf —— doom.
3 2 to _ elf aflume the pride, — an infamous baſe regicide.
— thy bloudy Greeks applauded be,
I diſavowy abhor thy deed and thee.
Barbarian / how durſt thou with ſorrade
And beaſtly rage, ſo brave a Life conclude ?
How durſt thou live when thou the deed hadſt done,
And having ſhed bis bloud, not (hed thy own ?
Speak | =
Who made thee arbitratouref his fate ?
Say for what deed, why didſt aflatlinate? —
Who bid thee ? |
Gods! do I my ſenſe retain?.
Was it not you that did his death ordain *
Wouldſt thou a raving Lover then believe?
And could nut thou my inward. thoughts perceive ; 4
By all I did thou — eaſe eſpy,
My heart each moment gave my tongue the lye.
_— thou perceivſt my Soul with fury burn d, ughteſt thou not; baſe Man de have rrturmd
A A bundred times before the deed:
ade, or eliè my preſence ſnun >:
chou not to me todo me riginꝰ
Lee where we hate hy fight : >
See thy Loves curſed fruit I ſind toolate,
Thou cameſt to taint me with thy wretched fate.
To ſhedrhe: plagues atiat follow. thee, on me,
And all of ll; ies —F —5
Be gone ! — I here „and I proclaim.
T Sparta, 28 — all my friends dickaim |
R my fam curſt muſt be,
That ſuch a Maſter — produc'd as thee
Come Madam, come, your freedom Fle beſtow, (is An-
Pyrrbus ordain d it. let us quickly go. drom:
Pay
Ore ii.
reſt.
w—
Mad.
P7lad. That cruel Woman ſtill poſſeſs your thougfits!
Andromache; A Tragedy. Pay our laſt duties to his injur d Ghoſt, And ſtrive which of us ſhall revenge him moſt.
L Exit. Herm. & Androm.
What have I ſeen? was this Hermione ? | —_ op gr I came to ſhed thisbloud ! was it Pyrihus dyed! —am I Oreftes 2
I ſtifled every reaſon 4 appear, Pp
Kill'd with a King I did revere;
Did violate all rights that appertain,
To Soveraign Embaſſadours or Men
Or Altars, whieh my fury did beſiege, Committing Murder, Treaſon, Sacriledge. And all for an ingrateful one; who ſwore,
If I not kill d him; nere toſee me more.
And now I have accompliſht her deſires,
His Bloud andLife ſhe at my hand requires. Eoves Him — but me does as a Monſtce ſhun, Though-ſhe, and her commands have made me one.
Enter Pylades.
Sir Iet us fly with ſpeed out of the Temple,
Or elſe reſolve to tarry here for ever.
Our Grerians for a while defend the Gates, But all th' aſſembled people now purſue us, Subnimtting to Androwaeche's commands;
She as their Oeen they treat, and us as enemies. Andromache to P ſo rebellions,
Now pays him all duties of a faithful Widow, Their Kings revenge commands e m to purſue, And will perhaps revenge her Hector too. eee PR — — — ard — and whilſt reine. We may our ſelves in ſafety hence convergh.-
No Friend, it is Merwione Ile follow | —-
Iwill no longer live under her hate, The crime I've done, Inow will expiate:-
Heark |.
17
46
2 =
»
9 —
Andromac he. A Tragedy,
Heark ! claſh of arms > the Temple is urrqundeg, Which way ſhall we eſcape? [_ looks out ] ——
What do I ſee —— K Oh! fatal ſight, Her mione all pale,
And bleeding, bither by our Souldiers brou br, With her dead Pyrrbav , — in tranſports of
Sh' has done ſome bloudy violence to her (elf.
Euter Greeks, bringing m the ,Bodjes of Pyrrhus and Hermione. OreSt. Hermione dead? Oh! Gods! ö
AGreek. Conveighung
2. Greek, 1
„
Sir, The Body of King Pyrrhav to our Fleet, We were
Encountred by the Souldiers of Amdrowache,
To whoſe command now all things are ſubjected. Whilſt we were fighting for, the royal prey, Hermione with love and rage diſtracted,
Ranto it ſwiftly thraugh — thickeſt Troops, And in an inſtant,
Lifting her eyes to Heaven, and deeply lighang 3, Before the Guard that watcht could ſtay her hand, She ſtrook to the Hilt a Ponyard in her — And with a 2 fell dead upon the body.
their Guards we have — dem hither
And for a while have made Andromache, | Take refuge in the Palage — bur maſt uſe, The opportunity this moment offers, | M, or in this Temple be enclos'd for ever |
Oreſt. What doll ſee? you angry Gods! I thank you!
/ J
My miſery dpes at the height appear,
And after this L have no moxe to fe. Your hatred Gods has now done all it can, And ſhewn in me
Th accompliſht model of a wretched man
L grows-alitue raving
Where
*
Aadromuche. A Tragedy. Where are the Lovers! —— now Ile cro
And in _ bloud and mine my Le drown. OO
In ſpite of em Ile ſleep rar Amos
Tp little 399 d. afford,
And jour px vieh never could accord.
But ha! — what frightful ſhades are theſe ſurround me > Where ſhall Igo? what horrour ſeizes me?
Dam up the I place,
Rivers of bloud, with purple Waves flow round met
?yled. Oh Gods! he grows diftratied | Sw] Oreſter
Remove the horrid objects from his fight. carry the They have diſturbed hisreaſon! it is loſt! 2 w4
Oreſt. Ha! Pyrrhas ] have I met thee once again?
Once more encountred here my hated rival ?
Pierc'd with ſo haſt thou fav'd chy ſexꝰ Art thou immortal, I le reſolve the de
There! there's a blow that I reſerv'd for thoeꝰ
—— do Iſee? Hermione embracing him
t — with her Fair Arits,
him in my Guang lim from the that threatens him ? pale and frightful looks ſhe caſts upon me
y — — Devils and Furies follow her. | At whom Damn'd Haggs, do thoſe your Serpents hiſs? Why do you pleate'm now about your brows.
For whom do you prepare thoſe iron whips ?
Here! here f come take me vo evermal nig
Oreſtes to your rage refigns himſelf.
No no - retire— leave me do Heywione n
_ his realbu d wholly See all — ur of the brave Orelfer F ::
Is to me more precious Y Eero let's manage well this little moment.
1
5
Androwaobe. A Tragedy:
9 er. .
Lets haſten quickly to out Fleet, and ſave him: Now whilft his wandring reaſbn wholly dea ves him,
To our diſpoſe if he his ſenſe regain, | All our * of him will be in vai. [ an alarm, Hell dye in — of us — the e is near =—
Arm! Arm!
Enter Phoenix with a Guard, and fall on Pylades and int tho make good their retreat aut of the Temple, ſtill guarding Oreſtcs. After an alarm, Enter Andromache, leading yourlg '\ Altyanax, followed by Ceptule.
doen. Gormmubeir Float? 1 I ſaw eim from a Tower, ; . * *: Maintam with wondrous courage ther retreat,
And ſpite of all the fury of our Men,
Get ſafe aboard. |
Whil& our enraged Souldiers on theſhore, + Seeing their waving ſtreamers mocked their fury,
Confounded betwixt rage and ſhame were ready,
To plunge-mto the Billows, and ſwim after em.
aden. Ye Gods! what myſteties uf fate are thelz,. . |
144
hat I ſhould here revenge my enemies
The fierce revenger of his death become
Who ſhauld have dyed upon my Husbands e
Come Child from this unhappy Place tersfly} 4
But whither ſhall we leave our miſery. xg 0 |
Who tb the unforwnate will kind appear,
The wretched are unwekome very heren .
On the wide dra we tove where: Tempeſta FE ©
And are forbid to Land on every ſhare. ] -r
All the Eſtates of (Greece are nm db N LS <4
» Gainſt s Infant to have Marz prœclaimidl I
And all the help our vyretchetd hne afford . 222
I bor to fly from them vessel nen- rer "Exenrts 20111 n. cy 227 al
79 945; laß N. 1 S8 51 20 .
