Requested Title: PSYCHE
Authors: Thomas Shadwell
Matched Anchor: PSYCHE
TCP: A59443
EEBO: 12621728
Source Title: Psyche a tragedy / written by Tho. Shadwell.
Source Author: Shadwell, Thomas, 1642?-1692.; Molière, 1622-1673. Psyché.; Locke, Matthew, 1621 or 2-1677.; Draghi, Giovanni Battista, ca. 1640-1708.
Source Date: 1675
Source URL: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/A59443/master/A59443.xml
Metadata Score: 1.250
Unit Score: 1.000

---

PSYCHE: A TRAGEDY, Acted at the Duke's Theatre. Written by THO. SHADWELL
LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1675
To the most Illustrious Prince, JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH, and c
May it please Your Grace,
May it please Your Grace,
Y Our Grace has so Nobly Patronized this Undertaking, that I should rob you of your due, if I should not hum bly lay this Play at your feet, since by your great and generous encou ragement of it, you have made that and the Author eternally your own. But had I never received any Obligation, by my particular Inclination I am bound to your Grace, since I am the most humble admirer of your Heroick Vertues, who by your early and unimitable Example, and by your eminent Com mand, are the greatest Patron of Arms; and by your Government of the most famous of Universities, are become the greatest Protector of Arts: of that Uni versity, which I can never mention without reverence; and from which I have yet another Tie to your Grace, since I had once the honour to be a Member of that Illustrious Society, which though it be the most Learn ed in the World, can boast of no greater Honour then that of being commanded by so Excellent a Prince; one who is equally Valiant against his Enemies, and Courteous to his Friends; whose boundless Courage is always ready to vanquish the one, and whose Prince ly Generosity is always ready to oblige the other
I shall not here recite those Heroick Actions, which all Europe have celebrated, and none have equall'd: Those are too Great for an Epistle Dedicatory, and onely fit for solid, lasting History; which certainly must do your Grace that right, to Enrol you in the fore most Rank of Fame. Nor can we doubt, but the me mory of your Grace's Actions will last, when Time shall have devoured the Places where they were per formed: When Mastrick shall be a heap of Rubbish, and the name might otherwise be swallow'd in the Ruine, it will be remembred by the greatest Action in the World, done there by the Greatest and the Earliest Hero, and by one, who for all his fierceness of Courage, has yet that Gentleness to Mankind, that he thinks that day lost, in which he does not oblige. One who is not onely infinitely bless'd in the most excellent Partner of his Joys and Cares, happy above measure in the Goods of Mind, the Perfections of Body, and the greatest Splendour and Ornaments of Fortune, but he enjoys all these unenvied; nay, is not onely free from every mans envy, but has his love
I should be afraid of this boldness, in once mention ing things so much above my Pen, were I not assured of your Grace's Generosity, that enclines you to par don, even a well-intended Errour, in your humble Creature, who begs Protection from you, and needs it too
I have, by my misfortune, not my fault, met with some Enemies, who are always ready to do me the ir reparable injury, to blast my Reputation with the King; and when I have the Honour to please Him, (which is of all things in the world my greatest Am bition) endeavour to perswade him, that I do not write the Plays I own, or at least, that the best part of them are written for me; which is so malitious an aspersion, that I am sure they themselves believe it not, and they may as well accuse me of firing the City. I am sure (though I may want Wit to write a Play) I have more ho nesty then to own what another man writes. But I am not yet so poor as to borrow; if I should, I should find not many that are rich enough to lend, Wit being much a scarcer Commodity then Money, I am sure with some who have reported this of me; who what ever they have of of one, have scarce enough of the other to supply their own necessities; and therefore I should be but very slenderly furnished from them
I can never enough acknowledge the Honour done me by your incomparable Durchess, in endeavouring to clear me of this Aspersion: And who would not be proud of being aspersed, to be so vindicated? From this and some other injuries of my Enemies, I humbly beg your Grace's protection, who, I am sure, have Good ness and Greatness enough to defend me against them: And I had rather owe it to your Grace, then to any man: For no man is more then I,
My Lord, Your Grace's Most devoted humble Servant, THO. SHADWELL
My Lord, Your Grace's Most devoted humble Servant, THO. SHADWELL
PREFACE
I N a good Natur'd Countrey, I doubt not but this my first Essay in Rhime would be at least forgiven; especially when I promise to offend no more in this kind: But I am sensible, that here I must encounter a great many Difficulties. In the first place (though I expect more candour from the best Writers in Rhime) the more moderate of them (who have yet a numerous party, good Judges being very scarce) are very much of fended with me, for leaving my own Province of Comedy, to invade their Dominion of Rhime: But me-thinks they might be satisfi'd, since I have made but a small in cursion, and am resolv'd to retire. And were I never so powerful, they should escape me, as the Northern People did the Romans, their craggy barren Territories being not wo •... the Conqu'ring. The next sort I am to encoun ter with, are those who are too great Admirers of the French Wit, who (if they a •... not like this Play) will say, the French Psyche is much better; if they do, they will say, I have borrow'd it all from the French. Whether the French be better, I leave to the Men of Wit (who under stand both Languages) to determine; I will onely say, Here is more Variety, and the Scenes of Passion are wrought up with more Art; and this is much more a Play then that. And I will be bold to affirm that this is as much a Play, as could be made upon this Subject. That I have borrow'd it all from the French, can onely be the objection of those, who do not know that it is a Fable, written by Apulejius, in his Golden Ass; where you will find most things in this Play, and the French too. For several things concerning the Decoration of the Play, I am oblig'd to the French, and for the Design of Two of the onely moving Scenes in the French, which I may say, without vanity, are very much improv'd, being wrought up with more Art in this, then in the French Play, without borrowing any of the thoughts from them
In a thing written in five weeks, as this was, there must needs be many Errours, which I desire true Criticks to pass by; and which perhaps I see my self, but having much bus'ness, and indulging my self with some pleasure too, I have not had leisure to mend them, nor would it indeed be worth the pains, since there are so many splendid Objects in the Play, and such variety of Diversion, as will not give the Audience leave to mind the Writing; and I doubt not but the Candid Reader will forgive the faults, when he considers, that the great Design was to entertain the Town with variety of Musick, curious Dancing, splen did Scenes and Machines: And that I do not, nor ever did intend to value my self upon the writing of this Play. For I had rather be Author of one Scene of Comedy, like some of Ben. Johnsons, then of all the best Plays of this kind that have been, or ever shall be written: Good Comedy requiring much more Wit and Iudgment in the Writer, then any Rhiming, unnatural Plays can do: This I have so little valu'd, that I have not alter'd six lines in it since it was first written, which (except the Songs at the Marri age of Psyche in the last Scene) was all done Sixteen moneths since. In all the words which are sung, I did not so much take care of the Wit or Fancy of'em, as the making of'em proper for Musick; in which I cannot but have some little knowledge, having been bred for many years of my Youth to some performance in it
I chalked out the way to the Composer (in all but the Song of Furies and Devils in the Fifth Act) having de sign'd which Line I would have sung by One, which by Two, which by Three, which by four Voices, and c. and what manner of Humour I would have in all the Vocal Musick
And by his excellent Composition, that long known able and approved Master of Musick, Mr. Lock, (Composer to His Majesty, and Organist to the Queen) has done me a great deal of right; though, I believe, the unskilful in Musick will not like the more solemn part of it, as the Musick in the Temple of Apollo, and the Song of the De spairing Lovers, in the Second Act; both which are pro per and admirable in their kinds, and are recommended to the judgment of able Musicians: for those who are not so, there are light and ayery things to please them
All the Instrumental Musick (which is not mingled with the Vocal) was composed by that Great Master, Seignior Gio: Baptista Draghi, Master of the Italian Musick to the King. The Dances were made by the most famous Master of France, Monsieur St. Andree. The Scenes were Painted by the Ingenious Artist, Mr. Stephenson. In those things that concern the Ornament or Decoration of the Play, the great industry and care of Mr. Betterton ought to be re member'd, at whose desire I wrote upon this Subject
POSTSCRIPT
I Had borrow'd something from two Songs of my own, which till this Play was Printed, I did not know were pub lick; but I have since found 'em printed in Collections of Poems, viz. part of the Song of the Despairing Lovers, in the Second Act, and about Eight lines in the First Act, beginning at this line, 'Tis frail as an abortive Birth. This I say, to clear my self from Thiev'ry, 'tis none to rob my self. The Reader may please to take notice ofseveral Errata's, as,
Page 2. for, bright Sun exhales, read, gross Earth exhales. p. 6. after, where you shall be adorn'd by me, insert, with all the Treasures of the East and West. p. 15. l. 5. for, upon the Tripod, read, before which stands the Tripod. p. 18. before, it Thunders, insert, As the Priestess Pythia is mounting the Tripod. p 42. read, Great Statues of Gold stand ing upon Pedesta •... , with small Figures of Gold sitting at their feet. Several other Errors there are, which the sense will help you to correct,
Prologue
AS a young Wanton when she first begins,
With shame and with regret of Conscience sins;
So fares our trembling Poet, the first time,
He has committed the lewd sin of Rhime,
While Custom hardens others in the Crime
It might in him that boldness too beget,
To lay about him without fear or wit
But humbly he your pardon does implore;
Already he repents, and says he'll sin no more
His bus'ness now is to shew splendid Scenes,
T'interpret 'twixt the Audience and Machines
You must not here expect exalted Thought,
Nor lofty Verse, nor Scenes with labour wrought
His Subject's humble, and his Verse is so;
This Theme no thundring Raptures would allow,
Nor would he, if he could, that way pursue
He'd ride unruly Fancy with a Bit,
And keep within the bounds of Sense and Wit,
Those bounds no boystrous Fustian will admit
And did not gentle Hearers oft dispence
With all the Sacred Rules of Wit and Sense;
Such tearing Lines, as crack the Writers Brain,
And the laborious Actors Lungs o'rstrain,
Wou'd, on our Stages, be roar'd out in vain
In all true Wit, a due proportion's found,
To the just Rules of heighth and distance bound
Wit, like a Faulcon, tow'ring in its flight,
When once it soars above its lawful height,
Lessens, till it becomes quite out of sight
But of such flights, there is no danger now;
He would not soar too high, nor creep too low
Howe'r, he hopes you will excuse his haste,
For he this gawdy Trifle wrote so fast;
Five weeks begun and finish'd this design,
In those few hours he snatch'd from Friends and Wine;
And since in better things h'has spent his time,
With which he hopes ere long t'atone this Crime
But he, alas! has several pow'rful Foes,
Who are unjustly so, and yet he knows,
They will, what e'r he writes, though good, oppose
If he the honour has to please the best,
'Tis not his fault if he offends the rest
But none of them yet so severe can be,
As to condemn this Trifle more then he
PSYCHE
ACT I
The Scene is a very deep Walk in the midst of a mighty Wood, through which is seen a Pro spect of a very pleasant Country
Enter Psyche and two Ladies
Psyc
HOw charming are these Meads and Groves!
The Scene of Innocence and Artless Loves;
Where Interest no discord moves
No stormy passions can the mind invade,
No Sacred Trust is violated here
1. Lad
Man does not here his own kind fear,
Traps are for Wolves and Foxes made,
And Toyls for Beasts, not Men, are laid;
Man is not here by Man betray'd
2. Lad
Here no man's ruine is with baseness sought,
For in this happy place no Court-like Arts are taught
Psyc
How pleasant is this undisturb'd retreat,
With harmless Joys and Rural Sports,
Free from tumultuous Cares that trouble Courts,
And all the Factions which disturb the Great
1. Lad
How vain their gaudy Pomp and Show,
To which the cheated Vulgar bow!
Their Splendor and their perish'ng Pride,
Their shining Revels, their adult'rate Joys,
When in the midst of all this pomp and noise,
In their unquiet minds still anxious thoughts reside
2. Lad
Their Triumphs are disturb'd with fears,
Their Joys allay'd with griefs and cares
Envy and pride possess each breast,
And guilty dreams distract their rest
Psyc
From sleep to dang'rous Arts they 'wake;
To undermine each other all mean ways they take
Each strives who shall his Monarch lead,
Though at the price of his own Father's head
Nor care they how much they their Prince misguide,
To serve their Lust, their Avarice, and Pride
1. Lad
Yet there the Mighty are not prosp'rous long,
Though ne'r so cunning, ne'r so strong;
Though ne'r so much indear'd to th' Crown
Fresh Favourites succeed and pull them down
Psyc
As a black Cloud which the bright Sun exhales,
Swell'd and opprest with its own weight,
Down to the Earth rent with fierce Lightning falls
So splendid Fav'rites in their envi'd height,
Big with the swellings of their Pride and Pow'r,
Do seldom scape the dismal hour,
When by some new-rais'd Meteors torn,
They from the highest pinacle of fate,
Fall to the most dejected state,
And from the Idols of the world become the scorn
These Troubles in my Father's Court I've seen,
And ne'r can wish to be a Queen
1. Lad
Cannot so many pow'rful Princes move
Psyche 's obdurate heart to Love?
2. Lad
Not one who can a Prince in Greece be call'd,
Who is not by your Eyes enthrall'd
Each Prince great Psyche does adore,
And pity from her heart implore
1. Lad
But you with all their charms unmov'd remain,
And smile when every Captive shakes his Chain
Psych
Not all the Pomp of Courts can ere remove
Me from the Pleasures of the quiet Grove
Each pretty Nymph to me her Tribute yields
Of all the fragrant Treasure of the Fields
Garlands and Wreaths they bring
From the sweet bosome of the Spring
And with their rural Numbers sing my Praise,
In soft delights passing their quiet days
Princes in all the Calms of Peace,
Have no such pow'rful Charms as these
Shall I for Courts abandon this soft life,
For splendid Beggery, and for smiling strife?
[A Symphony of Recorders and soft Musick
What Harmony is this which fills the Air?
And does my Senses charm?
2. Lad
Some Entertainment your poor Swains prepare,
Which they each day perform
Enter Pan with his Followers, and Sings in Recitative
Pan sings
Great Psyche, Goddess of each Field and Grove,
Whom every Prince and every God does love
To your all-commanding hand
Pan yields his Sovereign Command
For you the Satyrs and the Fawns
Shall nimbly trip it or the Lawns
For you the Shepherds Pipe and Sing,
And with their Nymphs Dance in a Ring
Fruits shall they bring, and pretty Garlands weave,
And shall the Meads of all their Sweets bereave
Vertumnus and Flora their Tribute shall pay,
And to Psyche shall dedicate this happy day
The Sylvans and Dryads shall Dance all around,
And Psyche dread Queen of this Place shall be Crown'd
My Lov'd Syrinx and Eccho shall sing and shall play,
And to Psyche shall dedicate this happy day
Chor
And Pan, who before all here did command,
Now resigns all his Empire to Psyche 's fair hand
They all kneel and sing the Chorus
They all kneel and sing the Chorus
[While the following Symphony 's playing, Pan Crowns her with a Garland, his Attendants present her with Fruits, Flowers, and c
A short Symphony of Rustick Musick, representing the Cries and Notes of Birds. Then an Entry Danc'd by Four Sylvans and Four Dryads to Rustick Musick. At the end of the Dance, the Dryads upon their knees present Psyche with Fruits and Flowers; and the Sylvans present her with Wreathes of Lawrel, Myrtle and Cyprus. Then Exeunt Sylv. and Dryads. Then a short Symphony of Rustick Musick, representing an Eccho. The Dryads and Sylvans presenting their Offerings
One sings
1. Voice
Great Psyche shall find no such pleasure as here
Eccho
no such pleasure as here
as here
2. Voices
Where her dutiful Subjects shall all stand in awe
Eccho
shall all stand in awe
in awe
3. Voices
Her Frowns and her Smiles shall give us all Law
Eccho
shall give us all Law
all Law
4. Voices
And from us of Rebellion she need have no fear
Eccho
she need have no fear
no fear
Voices, Flajolets, Violins, Cornets, Sackbuts, Hoa-boys: All joyn in Chorus
[Here the Singers mingle with the Dancers
Chor
How happy are those that inhabit this place,
Where a sigh is ne'r heard, where no falshood we meet,
Where each single heart agrees with the face
No Climate was ever so calm and so sweet
Eccho
was ever so calm and so sweet
so calm and so sweet
so sweet
1. Voice
To beauteous Psyche all devotion is due
Eccho
all devotion is due
is due
2. Voices
Our humble Offerings she will not despise
Eccho
she will not despise
despise
3. Voices
Since the Tribute is offer'd from hearts that are true
Eccho
from hearts that are true
are true
4. Voices
From hearts all devoted to Psyche 's bright Eyes
Eccho
to Psyche 's bright Eyes
bright Eyes
Chor
How happy are those, and c
[They Dance
Psyc
Oh happy Solitude! Oh sweet Retreat!
Free from the noise and troubles of the Great!
Not all the wealth of all the world shall charm
Me from this calm retirement here,
Where I enjoy all pleasure, know no fear,
No Joy can here surprise, nor Danger can alarm
Enter Four Women, personating Ambition, Power, Plenty and Peace
What new unwelcome Guests are these,
That wou'd invade my peace?
Amb
We come t'invite you from your vicious ease,
To Courts, where glorious Actions are perform'd
Leave lazy Groves, for active Palaces,
Where you by great Ambition may be warm'd;
By me to noble thoughts may be inflam'd,
To think of Ruling Kings, not silly Swains,
Each day your Beauty a new Captive gains,
And in all Courts no other Beauty's nam'd
Power
I from your solitude do you invite,
And I am she for whom all Monarchs fight,
Power, Mankind's supreme delight
Fair Psyche to the Court, come follow me,
Numbers of Tributary Kings shall kneel to thee
What e'r can be within the prospect of thy Thought,
Shall instantly to thee by humble Slaves be brought
Plenty
Psyche, this lonely Desart quit,
The Scene of homelinese and poverty
A splendid Palace does your state befit,
Where you •... ll be adorn'd by me,
Thy life shall be but one continu'd Feast,
And every Prince shall be thy Guest
All Delicates I'll find for thy content,
Which Luxury inspir'd by Wit can e'r invent
Peace
And I to Crown all these,
Will give you everlasting Peace;
Peace, That no Fiends shall ever harm,
Nor the mad Tumults of Mankind allarm
My Olive still shall flourish where you are,
For Peace should always wait upon the Fair
Psyc
Happy are they who know Ambition least
I'm onely safe and quiet, while my breast
Is not with base Ambitious thoughts opprest,
Too turbulent to let poor Mortals rest
O'r all my Tyrant Passions Pow'r I have,
And scorn that Pow'r which can but rule a Slave
The use of mighty Riches is but small;
Besides I nothing coveting, have All
Peace, with such vain Companions never dwells,
She's onely safe in humble Groves and Cells,
Envy with Six Furies arise, at which Ambition, Power, Plenty, and Peace run away affrighted
1. Lad
What dreadful Vision does distract our sight!
Do not these Fiends your mighty mind surprise?
Psyc
Their ugly shapes bring wonder to my eyes,
But nothing can my constant mind affright
Envy sings
Envy 'gainst Psyche such black storms shall raise,
As all her pow'rful beams shall ne'r dispel
Beyond her strength shall be her suffering;
Her to the greatest misery I'll bring,
And e'r I've done, I'll send her down to Hell
1. Fury
In Hell too late she shall relent,
And all her arrogance repent
2. Fury
We Furies will torment your Soul,
And you shall weep and houl
1. Fury
And at the sight of ev'ry Snake
Tremble and quake
2. Fury
There you shall mourn eternally,
And to the quick shall feel each lash we give ▪
1. Fury
There you shall always wish to die,
And yet in spight of you shall always live
Chor. of all
There you shall always, and c
[Envy and Furies sink
2. Lad
What horrid words are these we hear?
I am almost dissolv'd with fear
Can Envy this sweet dwelling find
1 Lad
Envy the greatest Bane to all Mankind
What dreadful Fate does she foretel?
What Prophesie is this?
The Gods will sure do much amiss,
Should they permit you to be snatch'd to Hell
Psyc
Fate! do thy worst, thou ne'r shalt trouble me,
The Innocent within themselves are free
Envy, I can be valiant against thee
Enter Prince Nicander
2. Lad
But see the Prince Nicander does appear
Industrious Love pursues you every where
Nican
Madam, I to this Solitude am come,
Humbly from you to hear my latest doom
Psyc
The first command which I did give,
Was, that you should not see me here
The next command you will receive,
Much harsher will to you appear
Nican
How long, fair Psyche, shall I sigh in vain?
How long of scorn and cruelty complain?
Your eyes enough have wounded me,
You need not add your cruelty
You against me too many Weapons chuse,
Who am defenceless against each you use
Psyc
Shall no conceal'd retirement keep me free
From Loves vexatious importunity?
I in my Father's Court too long endur'd
The ill which I by absence thought t' have cur'd?
Nican
Planets, that cause our Fates, cannot be long obscur'd,
Though Comets vanish from our sense,
When they've disperss'd their fatal Influence
And nothing but the sad effects remain,
Yet Stars that govern us, wou'd hide themselves in vain
The momentary Clouds must soon be past
Which wou'd their brightness overcast
Psyc
Why should Nicander thus pursue in vain
Her, o'r whose mind he can no Conquest gain
For though my Body thus abroad you see,
My Mind shall stay within and keep its privacy
Nican
Blame not the passion you yourself create,
Which is to me resistless as my Fate
Can Psyche own such cruelties,
As vainly Priests impute to Deities?
To punish the Affections they inspire,
As if they'd kindle to put out a fire
If from the Gods we any gifts receive,
Our Appetites of Nature they must give
Let Priests for Self-denial then contend,
If we 'gainst Nature go, we Heav'n offend,
Who made that Nature to pursue its end
Natures desires Heav'ns known prescriptions are,
Of greater certainty than others far
Priests Inspirations may but Dreams be found,
Th'effects of Vapours or of Spleens unsound
But Nature cannot err in her own way,
And though Priests may, she cannot lead astray
Psyc
Nature the Gods first uncorrupted made,
But to corruption 'twas by Man betray'd;
Which when so much exorbitant they found,
What first they had made free, they justly bound
Nican
If Nature be not what the Gods first meant,
Then pow'rful Man defeated Heavens intent
If the Gods Engine of the World must be
Mended by them, how did they then foresee?
Must Men, like Clocks, be alter'd to go right?
Or though wound up by Nature, must stand still?
Must we against our own affections fight,
And quite against the Bias bend the will?
Psyc
Against your self y'have pleaded all this time;
If not to follow Nature be a crime,
Mine so averse to Love by Heav'n is made,
She above all by me shall be obey'd
Enter Polynices
Nican
Nature incites all humane kind to love;
Who deny that, unnatural must prove
How, Polynices, my great Rival here!
This is the onely way I him can fear
His Arms are far less dreadful then his Love
Psyc
Sir, what could your injurious kindness move,
Thus to disturb the quiet of my life?
In vain, great Princes, is your am'rous strife
Polyn
If I were singular, you might think me rude
But I can many dang'rous Rivals find
A violent passion makes me thus intrude
Be but to me as you're to others, kind;
Let not my death alone be here design'd
Too fatal was the first surprise
I suffer'd by your conqu'ring Eyes
Your pow'rful Charms no Mortal can resist,
I in an instant lov'd, and never can desist
Nican
Such violent and sudden love
Perhaps must soon remove
'Tis frail as an abortive Birth,
And as it soon approach'd, it soon may fly
As when too early flowers come forth,
From the first moment of their birth they die
Mine by degrees did to perfection grow,
And is too strong to be resisted now
Polyn
That which I have for that illustrious face,
Is Sympathy, not lazy Love
The Steel the Loadstone does as soon embrace,
And of it self will ne'r remove
Nican
The Steel you speak of may be snatch'd from thence
With very little violence
Polyn
Who shall commit that violence on me?
Nican
He who before has conquer'd thee
Thou didst my Empire, dost my Love invade?
My Love shall be my onely aid
And I again thy Conqueror can be
Polyn
I was by Fortune then betray'd,
But now by Love am much more pow'rful made
Oh that the way for Psyche to be wone,
Were for me to possess thy Throne,
I wou'd believ't already done
And when with ease I'ad triumph'd o'r thee,
Thou on thy knees should'st beg her Love for me
Nican
Did not her Sacred presence guard thy life,
This fatal place should soon decide our strife
I on thy conquer'd neck would tread,
And make thee forfeit soon thy useless head
I'd put an end now to your Love and you
And when perhaps I'd nothing else to do,
I might vouchsafe to take your petty Kingdom too
Polyn
Should my death soon ensue,
Which never can be caus'd by you,
It might to you some bold presumptions give,
You dare not think such thoughts while yet I live
For what thou hast already said,
Shouldst thou escape me with thy head,
Yet I will soon depopulate thy Land,
And leave thee none but Beasts for thy command;
Or may be, if thou fall'st into my hand,
I openly will thee in triumph lead
Thy Cities into Desarts I will turn,
And thou in Chains shalt tamely see 'em burn
Nican
Gods—
Psyc
Princes, let your untimely discord cease,
If my esteem you'd gain, conclude a peace
Each to the other must become a friend
Though Rivals, yet you must agree;
You but for something in the Clouds contend,
If thus you think to conquer me
Polyn
So absolute is your command,
That I my Rival will embrace;
Your will no Lover can withstand
I can do any thing but give my Rival place
Nican
Your Voice may still the fury of the Winds,
Or calm the most distemper'd minds
Wild Beasts at your command in peace would be,
When you make Rivals thus agree
[They embrace
Psyc
I ne'r can value Birth or State,
'Tis virtue must my heart obtain
You may each other emulate
In glorious actions; but must quit all hate,
Ere either of you my esteem can gain
The next command I give, must be,
Not to invade my privacy
Princes, farewel, you must not follow me
Nican
So sacred are the dread commands you give,
From you my death I humbly wou'd receive
For I can scarce hear this and live
Polyn
Your breath mens minds to any thing may move,
When you make Rivals one another love
[Exit Psyche
But see! her envious Sisters do appear,
Whose anger less then love we fear
As they are going off in haste, Enter Cidippe and Aglaura
Cid
Great Princes whither do you fly so fast?
Aglau
'Tis to their Idol Psyche by their haste
Cid
What Prince-like virtue can you find
In her poor and groveling mind?
Aglau
Heav'n did her Soul for Cottages create,
And for some vulgar purpose did design
Her mind's too narrow for a Prince's state,
She has no virtues which in Courts may shine
Cidip
Her beauty like her mind is vulgar too
Like the dull off spring of some Village Pair,
She might perhaps some Shepherds heart subdue,
But should, poor •... hing, of Princes looks despair
Aglau
A thousand times more charms they here might find,
Beauty, that's fit to attract great Princes eyes
But silly Love, forsooth, hath struck them blind;
For could they see, they would their Love despise
Nican
Farewell Such blasphemies we must not hear
Against the Goddess we adore
Poly
So beautiful to us she does appear,
That none shall ever charm us more
[Exeunt Nicander and Polynices
Cidip
Blasted be her Beauty, and her charms accurst,
That must our ruine bring;
I am almost with envy burst,
To see each day she can command a King
Aglau
And whilst she lives, we can no Lovers have
Oh that her Cradle had become her Grave!
Cid
She by each Prince is Idoliz'd,
Whilst our neglected Beauties may grow old,
And not be sought by them she has despis'd
Aglau
Oh that I live to hear this story told
This Theme has made my anger bold
I on her Beauty will revenge our Cause
We are not safe whilst breath she draws
Her an Example of Revenge I'll make
Cidip
Must we be thus neglected for her sake?
Venus! redress the wrongs which she has done
She may in time insnare your Son
She such an Idol by Mankind is made
Your pow'r no more will be obey'd;
Your Sacred Beauty they'l neglect,
Your Deity will have no more respect
Aglau
No Incense more will on your Altars smoke,
No Victims more will burn,
Each Prince her Worshipper will turn
Let this your great Divinity provoke;
Revenge your self, and take our part,
Punish her stubborn heart,
And by your utmost fury let her smart
[A Symphony of soft Musick
Cidip
What Divine Harmony is this we hear!
Such never yet approach'd my Ear!
[Venus descends in her Chariot, drawn with Doves
Aglau
See Venus Chariot hovering in the Air;
The Goddess sure has heard our pray'r
Venus sings
With kindness I your pray'rs receive,
And to your hopes success will give
I have with anger seen Mankind adore
Your Sister's beauty, and her scorn deplore
Which they shall do no more
For their Idolatry I'll so resent,
As shall your wishes to the full content
Your Father is with Psyche now,
And to Apollo 's Oracle they'll go
Her Destiny to know
Iby the God of Wit shall be obey'd,
For Wit to Beauty still is subject made
He'll so resent your cause and mine,
That you will not repine,
But will applaud the Oracle's Design
Cidip
Great Goddess, we our thanks return,
We after this no more shall mourn
Aglau
Your Sacred pow'r for ever we'll obey,
And to your Altars our whole Worship pay
[Venus ascends with soft Musick
Enter Theander with his Followers, and Psyche with two Ladies
Thean
Daughters, no more you shall contend,
This happy day your strife shall end
The Oracle shall ease you of your care;
We to the Temple will repair,
And Psyche will obey,
What e'r the Delphick God shall say
And—
What e'r Apollo shall command, shall be,
I swear by all the Gods, perform'd by me
Psyc
And on my knees I make this solemn vow,
To his Decree I will devoutly bow
Let his commands be what they will,
I chearfully will them fulfill
Thean
Let's to Apollo 's Temple then repair,
And seek the God with Sacrifice and Pray'r
[Exeunt omnes
ACT II
The Scene is the Temple of Apollo Delphicus, with Columns of the Dorick Order, inrich'd with Gold, in the middle a stately Cupulo, on the top of it the Figure of the Sun; some distance before it an Altar lin'd with Brass; under it a large Image of Apollo upon the Tripod
Enter in a Solemn Procession, the Chief Priest crown'd with Lawrel, in a white Vestment, over that, a Purple Gown, over that a Cope embroidered with Gold, over all a Lamb-skin Hood with the Wool on: He has four Boys attending, two before two be hind, clad in Surplices, and girt with Girdles of Gold; the first carrying a golden Censor with Mirrhe, Frankincense, and sweet Gums, and c. The Second a Barley Cake, or Barley Meal, with Salt, upon a golden Service. The third, a golden Cruise, full of Honey and Water. The fourth a large gilt Book emboss'd with Gold. After them six Priests, with Books of Hymns, clad in Surplices and embroider'd Copes. Then Men with Wind-Instruments, clad in Surplices, all crown'd with Wreathes of Lawrel. After them Nicander, Cidippe, Polinices, Aglau ra, Theander, Psyche. Then a Train of Ladies. All the Wo men with their faces cover'd with white Veils. After all, Theander 's Attendants and Guards in their Procession. This following Hymn is sung in Chorus
Chor
LEt's to Apollo 's Altar now repair,
And offer up our Vows and Pray'r;
Let us enquire fair Psyche 's destiny
Repeat
The Gods to her will sure propitious be,
If Innocence and Beauty may go free
Ch. P
Go on, and to the Altar lead
Chief Priest turns to the People, and sings on
This hallow'd ground let no one tread,
Who is defil'd with Whoredom, or with Bloud,
Lest all our pray'rs should be for them withstood
Let none be present at our Sacrifice,
But of an humble uncorrupted mind
The God for wicked men will all our vows despise
And will to all our wishes be unkind
[By this time they come near the Altar, they all bow, and divide, and stand on each side of the Altar, and the Chief Priest before. The Chief Priest kneels and kisses the Altar. The Priest and Boys kneel with him; they rise, and he, holding the Altar in his hands, sings alone, as follows
Ch. Pr
Son of Latona and great Jove,
In Delos born, which thou so much dost love
Great God of Physick and of Archery,
Of wisdom, Wit, and Harmony;
God of all Divinations too
Chor. of Voices and Instrum
To thee our vows and pray'rs are due
To thee our, and c
[Chief Priest kneels, kisses the Altar, then rises and sings
Ch. Pr
Thou gav'st the cruel Serpent Python death,
Depriv'dst the Giant Tyrion of his breath
Thou didst the monstrous Cyclops too destroy,
Who form'd the Thunder, which did kill thy Son
Chor
Thou light of all our life, and all our joy,
Our Offerings with our hearts are all thine own
[Chief Priest kneels, and kisses the Altar again
Ch. Pr
By sacred Hyacinth, thy much lov'd Flower,
By Daphne 's memory we thee implore,
Thou wou'dst be present at our Sacrifice,
And not our humble Offerings despise
Chorus of Voices and Instrum
And we for ever will thy praise advance
Thou Author of all Light and Heat
Let Pipes and Timbrels souna, and let them dance
Each day our worship we'll repeat,
Each day, and c
[A Dance of Priests entring from each side of the Stage, with Cym bals, Bells, and Flambeaux
After the Dance, they all kneel, and the Chief Priest begins with a loud voice; All answer as follows
Ch. Pr
Iupiter, Iuno, Minerva, Saturn, Cibele,
Respons
Be propitious to our vows and prayers
Ch. Pr
Mars, Bellona, Venus, Cupido, Vulcanus
Resp
Be propitious, and c
Ch. Pr
Bacchus, Pan, Neptunus, Sylvanus, Fawnus, Vertumnus, Palaemon
Resp
Be propitious, and c
Ch. Pr
All ye Gods, Goddesses, and all the powers
Resp
Be propitious, and c
They rise: The Chief Priest turns to the left hand, and runs, or dances about the Altar, Priests and Boys following him, all the Instruments sounding. They sing as follows
Chor
To Apollo our Celestial King,
We will Io Paean sing;
Io Paean, Io Paean,
Io Paean will we sing
The Dancers mingle with the Singers
The Chief Priest kneels at the Altar. The Boys stand about him. The Priests take the Libamina from the Boys, after a little pause. One Priest rises and waves a wand. Then all fall on their knees
1. Pr
Favete linguis, favete linguis, favete linguis
2. Pr
(rises, waves a wand)
Hoc agite, hoc agite, hoc agite
Ch. Pr. rises, and turns to the people
Ch. Pr
(with a loud voice)
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
Response of all
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
Chief Priest turns and kneels at the Altar again. The Boys run out and fetch, one a Flambeaux, the other little Fagots of Cedar, Juniper, and c. The Priest rises and lays them •... n the Altar. All but the Chief Priest and Boys are kneel ing, intent upon the Altar, without speech or motion. As soon as the fire is kindled, which the Priest does himself with the Flambeau
Ch. Pr
(with a loud voice) Behold the Fire
All but the Chief Priest fall flat on their faces, then rise again. The Boys reach the Libamina to the Chief Priest: 1. The Censor, with Gums, which he offers. 2. The Barley Cake, which he strews with salt, then lays it on the Fire. Then sprinkles the Honey and Water on the Fire. Chief Priest waves his Wand to Theander and Psyche, who draw near, and kneel just behind
Ch. Pr
Now ask the God the thing for which you came,
And after that we'll sacrifice a Ram
Thean
That we may know, we humbly pray,
Who shall Psyche 's Husband be
She will most cheerfully obey
Her Destiny, and your Decree
It Thunders and Lightens extremely. Apollo 's Image trembles, at which they all rise affrighted
Ch. Pr
O Heaven! what prodigy is this?
Something is in our holy Rites amiss
It Thunders and Lightens again, the Image trembling, and in convulsions, with a very loud and hollow voice utters these following Lines
Apollo
YOu must conduct her to that fatal place,
Where miserable Lovers, that despair,
With howls and Lamentations fill the air;
A Husband there your Daughter shall embrace
On Venus Rock upon the Sea,
She must by you deserted be;
A poys'nous Serpent there she'l find,
By Heav'n he Psyche 's Husband is design'd
[At this they all start, affrighted
Thean
Gods! that I e'r should live to see this day
'Tis for some great offence
Of mine, that thou art to be snatch'd from hence
Oh take my life, and let her stay
But 'tis in vain to ask, we must obey
For which I'll weep my hated life away
Cydip
Venus has kept her word, and she shall be
Much more ador'd by me,
Then any other Deity
Aglau
Now my fair Sister must a Serpent have,
'Stead of a Nuptial Bed, a Grave
Now she shall suffer for her pride;
Our Love and Hate will now be satisfi'd
Psyc
To whatsoe'r the Oracle thinks fit,
I cheerfully submit
I have not liv'd so ill, but I
With ease can die
I with a willing heart
Can with my life as with a trifle part
As no joy yet could ever fill my mind,
I from no danger can distraction find
Thean
Lead on; and with a funeral pace,
For I in that unhappy place
Must bury all my joy, and leave my life behind
Nican
Stay but a moment, stay;
You will not sure this Oracle obey
Consider and be wise
If it be good Psyche to sacrifice,
You were oblig'd to't without this command,
And we the action should not then withstand
Polyn
If bad, then Heav'n it self can't make it good;
All good and ill's already understood
Heav'n has forbid the shedding guiltless bloud
If good and ill anew it has design'd,
The Gods are mutable, and change their mind
Nican
Be not by this Imposture, Sir, betray'd,
By this dull Idol which the Priests have made
Too many Cheats are in the Temple found,
There fraud does more then piety abound
They make the sensless Image speak with ease
What e'r themselves shall please
Ch. Pr
Do not the sacred Image thus profane,
Which will revenge it self, and all its Rites maintain
Polyn
If that be sacred, and you that adore,
Then him that made it you should worship more
To th'poor Mechanick you give no respect,
Y'adore his Workmanship, but him neglect
Nican
For Sacred you impose what you decree,
And the deluded Multitude believe,
By boasting of Infallibility,
Th'unthinking Rabble you with ease deceive
Pol
What ever in Divinity you know,
In all concernments of Mankind below
In all the objects of the Mind,
And in all humone Science we can find,
In Priests more Errors then in all Mankind
Nican
In Sacred Things yet you so much excel
All others, in your Sleeps you can foretell;
When after surfeits in your holy Feasts
You sleep in skins of sacrificed Beasts,
The troubled Dreams you from those fumes receive,
To the unheedful world for Oracles you give
Thean
In holy Mysteries you must lay by
Your intricate Philosophy
After the dreadful Cloud with Thunder broke,
It was some loud immortal voice that spoke
Ch. Pr
The holy Rites you saw perform'd,
By Miracles were now confirm'd
Nican
Miracles!
Your holy Cheats t'advance your Mystery
The noblest Science is Divinity
But when become a Trade, I see 'twill be,
Like other Trades, maintain'd by Knavery
Ch. Pr
By Miracles the pow'r of Heav'n is known
Polyn
Heav'ns power is more by setl'd order shown ▪
The beauty of that order which is found,
To govern the Creation in a round,
The fix'd uninterrupted Chain whereby
All things on one another must depend,
This method proves a wise Divinity,
As much as should the Gods on earth descend
Ch. Pr
You speak from Nature, which is ignorance;
But we to Inspiration must advance
Nican
If, Priest, by Means not nat'ral Heav'n declares ▪
Its will, and our obedience so prepares;
The Gods by this their weakness wou'd confess,
What you call Miracles, wou'd make them less
If something without Nature they produce,
Nature is then defective to their use
And when by that they cannot work their end,
By Miracle their Instrument they mend
Polyn
If this be granted, Priest, by this we find,
The Gods foresee not, or else change their mind
But Heav'n does nothing to our sense produce,
But it does outward Nat'ral Causes use
Fools trust in Miracles, and fools ne'r doubt
'Tis ignorance of Causes, Priest, makes fools devout
[Thunders again
Ch. Pr
Be gone, profane and wicked men,
You have provok'd Heav'ns wrath again
Heav'n does again to you in Thunder speak!
Nican
'Twas nothing but a petty cloud did break;
What, can your Priesthoods grave Philosophy
So much amaz'd at common Thunder be?
Psyc
We should obey without these prodigies;
I to Heav'ns Will my own will sacrifice
Cidip
Must I then with my much lov'd Sister part?
Aglau
The dismal loss will break my tender heart
Thean
Joy of my life, let's to the fatal place,
Where thine and all my sorrow is design'd
When thee the pois'nous Serpent shall embrace,
Assure thy self I'll not stay long behind
Polyn
Thus the great Agamemnon was betray'd,
And Iphigenia thus a Victim made
Such horrid ills Religion can perswade
[Exeunt omnes
The Scene changes to a Rocky Desart full of dreadful Caves, Cliff, and Precipices, with a high Rock looking down into the Sea
Enter two despairing Lovers
1. Lov
Ah what a dreadful Rocky Desart's this,
The Melancholly Region of despair
Where e'r I turn me, poisonous Serpents hiss,
And with their venomous breaths infect the air
2. Lov
Here pestilential vapours do abound,
And killing Dumps the Vaults and Caverns breath;
From dreadful gapings of the craggy ground,
The fatal Desart seems to yawn forth death
1. Lov
A gloomy darkness hovers o'r this place;
Here sure the Sun ne'r shews his joyful face
Nature this place for horrour did design
No beam of comfort here can shine;
2. Lov
Nothing but houls of sad despair,
And dismal groans of Wretches fill the air
Who in Agonies their hated lives resign
1. Lov
How many various ways to death we have
Some from that Rock have plung'd into the Deep;
And in the Sea we saw'em find a grave
2 Lov
Some by their Ponyards meet deaths easie sleep
Some desp'rate Lovers find out death,
By wilful stopping their own breath
1. Lov
Nature this place did for my griefintend
2. Lov
And here my fatal life and love shall end
1. Lov
Psyche is hither by Apollo sent,
Here to fulfil the Oracles intent
Two despairing Men and two despairing Women sing as follows
1. Man
BReak, break distracted heart, there is no cure
For Love, my minds too raging Calenture
1. Wom
Sighs which in other passions vent,
And give them ease when they lament,
Are but the bellows to my hot desire
2. Wom
And tears in me not quench, but nourish fire
2. Man
Nothing can mollifie my grief,
Or give my passion a relief
1. Man
Love is not like our carthly fire,
You soon may smoother out that flame;
Concealing does increase desire,
No opposition Love cantame
2. Wom
Despair in Love transcends all pain,
Lost hope will ne'r return again
1. Wom
In Hell there's no such misery,
As now oppresses me
I this one pang alone
Wou'd change for Sisyphus his Stone
2. Man
I would the torments which I feel
Change for I •... n 's Wheel
2. Wom
The Vulture should on me for ever feed,
Rather then thus my heart for Love should bleed
1. Man
Oh Tantalus! for thy eternal Thirst;
I'm more on Earth then thou in Hell accurst
1. Wom
Was ever grief like mine?
2. Wom
Like mine?
1. Man
Like mine?
2. Man
Like mine?
Cho rus
Was ever grief like mine?
Was ever, and c
2. Wom
Nothing but death can cure our misery
1. Wom
I'll die
1. Man
I'll die
2. Man
I'll die
Cho rus
Nothing but death can cure our misery
Nothing but, and c
1. Man speaks
How long shall I for this dull Serpent stay,
Ere I become his prey?
Come forth from out thy pos'nous Den
Dost thou despise the flesh of Men?
2. Man
The lazy Serpent breakfasted to day;
I will not for his waking stomach stay
I ll b' Author of my fate, and make my self away
[Falls on his sword
1. Wom
Your Sex no more in courage shall excel,
For I can die as well
I in this dagger my relief will find,
And kill my body thus to ease my mind
[Kills her self
1. Man
I to the top of all the Rock will climb;
And if in little time
The Serpent there I cannot see,
I'll find a way to follow thee
2. Wom
My heart that office will perform for me
A death-like pang I feel,
I have no need of steel
A faint cold sweat besmears my face,
I can make haste and die apace
And these are the last words I ere shall speak,
Farewell my cruel Love, for thee my heart does break
[She dies. Then he on the top of the Rock falls headlong into the Sea
Enter Theander, Psyche, Cydippe, Aglaura, Psyche 's two Women, and other Attendants, in Funeral habits, weeping; then the Guards
Psyc
Oh stop those Royal Fountains, tears are things
Which ill become the Majesty of Kings
Thean
But they become a Father, who must lose
The onely comfort of his fading life;
Who barbarously must his Child expose,
By Heavens command, to be a Serpents Wife,
Psyc
That dread command l'm ready to obey,
I beg you will no longer stay
Deaths cold embraces I will court;
I can my fate, but not your tears support
Thean
Ye Gods, why did ye ever bless
Me with this gift, to snatch it back again?
My burden's greater then I can sustain!
Psyc
I never could deserve such tenderness;
Nay, good Sir, dry your eyes, my heart will break;
To bear your grief, I am too weak
Thean
Oh that I'd never seen thy much lov'd face,
And that thou'dst perish'd in the womb
I had not led thee to this fatal place,
Thy Father had not brought thee living to thy Tomb
Psyc
Your sad complaints so soften me,
My heart will melt to that degree,
That I shall have none left when death I see
Thean
Heav'n! what could thus your cruelty provoke?
Your Altars by my bounty daily smoke
With Fat, with Incense, and with Gums;
Nor have you wanted Hecatombs
And must I thus rewarded be?
Cidip
See how the Dotard weeps, while we
Rejoyce at this her Destiny
Oh how it wou'd my envy feed,
Could my glad eyes behold her bleed!
Aglau
O good dear Serpent, make her sure,
Her death, our grief can onely cure
Oh that she were at my command,
And that her heart were throbbing in my hand
Some miracle may else relieve
Her from this death; and we afresh may grieve
Psyc
Good Sir, be gone, the will of Heav'n obey
Besides, if you should longer stay,
Before the Serpent comes, my life will steal away,
Weigh not your loss, but what you have remain;
You have the comfort of my Sisters left,
Who will your drooping age sustain,
When y'are of me bereft
Sisters, be good, and to my Father give
All comfort, and his grief relieve;
He, from you Two, much pleasure may receive
Cid
Our grief as much as his relief will need
Oh that I might with Psyche bleed
Did not the Gods self-murder hate,
I wou'd accompany your Fate
Aglau
Oh that the Gods would suffer me
To be exchang'd for thee!
Psyc
Sisters, farewel, pray dry your eyes;
kisses her Sisters
I am for you a sacrifice
You may your choice of many Princes have,
When I am cold, forgotten in my Grave
Thean
Gods! can I yet hear this and live?
Oh take my life, or me my Psyche give
Psyc
Sir, if you longer stay,
You'll cause my death, not they
I on my knees beseech you quit
This fatal place, and to Heaven's will submit
Farewell: 'tis time,
I now the Rock my fatal Tomb must climb
Farewell for ever—
Thean
Say not so,
For I to death will go
My Soul to morrow shall meet thine below
[Exeunt all but Psyche
Psyche sola
Even now grim death I slightly did esteem,
With the wrong end o'th'Glass I look'd on him;
Then a far off and little he did seem
Now my Perspective draws him near,
He very big and ugly does appear
Away—it is the base false Glass of fear
Enter Nicander and Polynices
Why do you come to see me wretched here?
What can you hope from her whose death's so near?
Polyn
To save your life our lives we will expose
Psyc
Can mortal men the heav'nly pow'rs oppose?
Nican
What Heav'n commands is surely good,
Heav'n has declar'd 'gainst shedding humane bloud
Bores, Rams and Bulls will serve Apollo 's turn,
Whilst Gums and Incense on his Altars burn
'Tis to the Priests that you are sacrific'd
Psyc
I must not hear the Oracle despis'd
Nican
In vain, 'gainst prejudice we still dispute
Our Swords shall this great Oracle confute
No Serpent whilst we live shall you embrace,
Nor any other Rival in this place
Psyc
He carries deadly venome in his breath,
Which certainly will give you death
Polyn
Cadmus without Love's aid the Dragon slew;
Inspir'd by Love, what cannot Princes do?
Psyc
Why for my preservation shou'd you strive?
For neither my affection e'r cou'd move,
Though Heav'n for that wou'd suffer me to live
No Prince on earth cou'd ever make me love
Nican
'Tis time we both of us should die,
Since we from you no pity can deserve
Yet——
Had we no love for generosity
Spight of your self we wou'd your life preserve
Polyn
You have made Rivals thus agree,
Though cou'd you love, but one cou'd happy be
Each will assist the other, and you'll see,
In spight of Oracles we'll set you free
Psyc
Farewell: I must not hear this blasphemy
Nican
We cannot leave you till you die,
No Oracle shall that deny
[The Earth opens, infernal Spirits rise and hurry the Prince away. Two Zephiri descend and take Psyche by each arm and fly into the Clowds with her
Cupid descends a little way, hanging in the air
Cup
Be gone, you Rivals of an angry Deity
Shall I by insolent Princes rivall'd be?
Shall Mortals for my Psyche strive with me?
Vulcan make haste, prepare
My costly Palace for my fair;
I in that splendid place
My Love, my Dear, my Psyche will embrace
[He flies away
Enter Nicander and Polynices
Nican
By what Enchantment were we hurri'd hence?
Psyche is gone. Let's use all diligence
Soon to prevent her fate,
Or we shall come too late
Polyn
We will our much lov'd Psyche find
Or we will leave our hated lives behind
[Exeunt
ACT III
The Scene is the Palace of Cupid, compos'd of wreath'd Columns of the Corinthian Order; the Wreathing is adorn'd with Roses, and the Columns have several little Cupids flying about 'em, and a single Cupid standing upon every Capital. At a good distance are seen three Arches, which divide the first Court from the other part of the Building: The middle Arch is noble and high, beautified with Cupids and Fe stoons, and supported with Columns of the foresaid Order. Through these Arches is seen another Court, that leads to the main Building, which is at a mighty distance. All the Cupids, Capitals and Inrichments of the whole Palace are of Gold. Here the Cyclops are at work at a forge, forging great Vases of Silver. The Musick strikes up, they dance, hammering the Vases upon Anvils
After the Dance, Enter Vulcan
Vulcan sings
YE bold Sons of Earth, that attend upon Fire,
Make haste with the Palace, least Cupid should stay;
You must not be lazy when Love does require,
For Love is impatient, and brooks no delay
When Cupid you serve, you must toil and must sweat,
Redouble your blows, and your labour repeat
The vigorous young God's not with laziness serv'd,
He makes all his Vassals their diligence show,
And nothing from him but with pains is deserv'd;
The brisk Youth that falls on, and still follows his blow,
Is his favourite still. The considerate Fool,
He as useless lays by for a pitiful Tool
1. Cycl
This Palace is finish'd, and the other shall be
Made fit for his small Deity
2. Cycl
But fire makes us cholerick, and apt to repine,
Unless you will give us some Wine
Chor
With swinging great Bowls,
Let's refresh our dry Souls,
And then we'll to work with a Clink, clink, clink;
But first let us drink, but first let us drink
Vulcan
Let each take his Bowl then, and hold it to his nose,
Then let him redouble his blows
Cycl
Nay, stint us not so, but let each take his two,
And twice as much then we can do
Chor
With swinging great Bowls,
Let's refresh, and c
Vulc
Ye Slaves, will you never from drunkenness refrain?
Remember Ulysses again
Cycl
Ulysses is a Dog, were he here he shou'd find
We'd scorn him, and drink our selves blind
Chor
With swinging great Bowls,
Let's refresh. and c
[They take their Kans in their hands
Pyra
Here, Harpes, to you
Harp
Here, Brontes, to you,
And so take each Cyclops his due
Bron
To thee, Steropes
Ster
Pyraemon, to thee
Omn
And thus in our Cups wee'll agree
Chor
With swinging great Bowls,
Let's refresh, and c
Vulc
Be gone, or great Jove will for Thunder bolts stay,
The world grows so wicked each day
Cycl
He has less need of Thunder then we have of Wine
We'd drink, though great Jove shou'd repine
Chor
With swinging great Bowls,
Let's refresh, and c
[The Cyclops dance again
Enter Cupid and Zephyrus, at which they all run away
Cup
You are my best of servants, y'have done well
Say, Zephyrus, how do you like my Love?
Zeph
Her Beauty does all mortal forms excel,
She should be snatch'd from Earth to reign above ▪
But why do you a humane shape now wear?
Why will you not your self a God appear?
Cup
At first, invisible I'll be,
Then like a Prince I will be seen;
Me like a God when she shall see,
I'll make her my Immortal Queen
When Love thus slily his approaches makes,
He takes fast hold, and long will stay;
But if by storm he once possession takes,
His Empire in the heart will soon decay
Here comes my Love Away,
And to her honour dedicate this day
[Exeunt Cupid and Zephyrus
Enter Psyche
Psyc
To what enchanted Palace am I brought,
Adorn'd beyond all humane thought?
Here Art and Natures utmost powers conspire,
To make the Ornament entire
Where e'r I turn me, here my dazl'd eye
Does nought but Gold or precious Gems descry
This sure is some divine abode,
The splendid Palace of some God
And not a Den where Humane bloud is spilt
This sure was never for a Serpent built
I am at this no less amaz'd,
Then at my sudden passage to the place
With wonder round about I've gaz'd,
And, which is strange, I've seen no humane face
'Tis sure some Aery Vision which I see,
And I to this imaginary height
Was rais'd by Heav'n in cruelty,
That I might suffer a severer Fate
I on a Precipice of hope was plac'd,
That so my fall might greater be,
And down with violence I shall be cast
To th'bottom of despair, th'Abyss of misery
Where is the Serpent? when will he appear?
Cup
The Serpent which you must embrace is near
Psyc
What Divine Harmony invades my ear?
This is a voice I cou'd for ever hear
O speak again, and strike my ravish'd sense
With thy harmonious excellence!
What Pow'r Divine provokes within my bloud,
I know not what, that cannot be withstood?
Cup
What ever can be pleasant but in thought,
[within
Shall for my Love be sought
This shall her Palace, here her Empire be;
She shall have Sovereign command o'r that and me
Psyc
No object of my sense could e'r
Transport me till this hour;
I feel a passion mix'd with Joy and Fear,
That's caus'd by this unknown invisible Power
Who are you that does charm me so?
〈◊〉 pain and pleasure I ne'r felt before;
You are by this some God, I know,
And I must you adore—
[she kneels
Enter Cupid, and takes her up
Oh Heaven! what glorious thing is this I see?
What unknown Deity?
His shape is humane, but his face divine;
He calls me Love: but ah! wou'd he were mine
Cup
I am the Serpent Heav'n for you design'd,
Which shou'd on you his poyson breathe
Psyc
This poison ne'r can cause my death,
For such a Serpent I wou'd quit Mankind
Yours is the pleasant'st poison e'r was felt;
My eyes drop showers of joy, my heart will melt
My mind was never full before,
But now my swelling joys run o'r;
My heart does pant like a seal'd Doves
What is it thus my passion moves?
Cup
How does my charming fair, my Dove?
Let me approach my Dear, my Love
Let me but touch thy snowy hand,
And thou shalt all my heart command
Psyc
There's no request of yours I can withstand
Oh I am stung! what's this I feel?
It is no pointed Steel
'Tis such a pretty tingling smart,
Now it invades my heart
Oh it increases on me still,
And now my bloud begins to chill
But, Oh the pleasure! Oh the pain!
And, Oh! might both a thousand years remain!
Cup
Courage, my Dove, I have thee here,
embra ces her
Thou need'st no Serpent fear;
For I am all the Serpents thou shalt see,
And Love is all the poison I'll infuse in thee
Psyc
What can it be my senses thus allarms?
What have you done t' your hand that thus it charms?
But, Oh your pow'rful eyes bewitch me more,
I never saw or felt such eyes before
Nor know I now what 'tis I feel or see
[He turns his head aside
Turn not away those eyes that poison me
Those sweet, those piercing am'rous eyes,
That can so easily a heart surprise
Oh, may my breast this poison ne'r forsake!
I'm sure no Antidote I'll take
Why do you sigh? are you transported too?
Cup
As you by me, so I am charm'd by you
Oh let my wandring heart find rest
Within thy soft and snowy breast
Thou must to me thy heart resign,
And in exchange I'll give thee mine
And when my heart within thy breast does sit,
Thou must be kind, and nurse, and cherish it
Psyc
Oh! how mine flutters; yet I hold it fast,
It bates till it it self will tire;
'Twill lose it self with violent desire
Do what I can, it will be gone at last
Oh give me thine, for mine will flie away;
Ah give it me! for if you longer stay,
Mine will be gone, and I shall die
Pray let your heart the want of mine supply
Cup
Thou through thy Lips, my Love, must mine receive,
And the same way thine to my breast convey;
And when to me that pretty thing thou'lt give,
I'll us't so kindly, 'tshall not fly away
Psyc
Then take it, for with me itwill not stay
[They kiss
What have I done! I am to blame;
I blush and feel a secret shame
But I feel something which o'rcomes that sense
I'm charm'd with so much excellence!
Some Power Divine thus animates my bloud,
And 'twere a sin if that shou'd be withstood
Your sacred form so much does move,
That I pronounce aloud, I love
How am I rap't! what is it thus does force
My inclination from its proper course?
I was to love an open enemy;
But now the more I look on Thee,
The more I love. My first surprise
Is heighten'd still by thy bewitching eyes
Cup
Love's debt was long deny'd by thee,
But now h'as paid himself with usury
Psyc
Should I to one I know not be thus kind,
To one who will, perhaps, unconstant be;
Pray let me so much favour find,
To let me know who 'tis has conquer'd me
Cup
Do not suspect my constancy,
Believe my sighs, and then trust me
Words may be false and full of Art,
Sighs are the nat'ral language of the heart
But, pray beware of curiosity,
Lest it shou'd ruine Thee and Me
You must not yet know who I am;
I will in time disclose my name
I in this Region a vast Empire have,
Each Prince y'have seen compar'd to me's a Slave
To me all Grecian Princes Tribute owe,
Which they shall pay to you
A thousand Beauties shall be still at hand,
Waiting for thy command;
And, without envy, they shall thee adore
The pomp which here thou shalt enjoy, is more
Then e'r was seen in Earthly Princes Courts
And pleasures here shall be
Beyond all mortal Luxury;
Our Recreations shall be heav'nly sports
And to such splendid Joys I thee invite,
As do the Gods on Festivals delight
But first thy pallat thou shalt satisfie,
Thy ear shall then be ravish'd, then thy eye;
And all thy other Senses thou shalt feast
Here thou shalt entertain, and I will be the guest
This following Song is sung by invisible Singers
ALl joy to fair Psyche in this happy place,
And to our great Master, who her shall embrace
May never his Love nor her Beauty decay,
But be warm as the Spring, and still fresh as the Day
Chor
No Mortals on earth ever wretched cou'd prove,
If still while they liv'd, they'd be always in love
There's none without Love ever happy can be,
Without it each Brute were as happy as we
The knowledge men boast of does nothing but vex,
And their wandering Reason their minds does perplex
But no Mortals, and c
Love's sighs and his tears are mix'd with delights,
But were he still pester'd with cares and with frights,
Shou'd a thousand more troubles a Lover invade,
By one happy moment they'd fully be paid
Chor
No Mortals, and c
Then lose not a moment, but in pleasure employ it,
For a moment once lost will always be so;
Your Youth requires Love, let it fully enjoy it,
And push on your Nature as far as 'twill go
Chor
No Mortals, and c
Psyc
How am I rap't! what pleasures do I find!
My Love, I have but one request to thee;
Two Sisters I have left behind,
I hope my Love will be so kind,
That they the Witnesses may be
Of all my pomp and my felicity
Enter Zephyrus
Cup
My Zephyrus is still at hand
To wait for thy command
Be gone—
Zeph
I'll fly as quick as thought,
They suddenly shall to this place be brought
[Exit Zephyrus
Cup
My Dear, let them not here much time employ,
For I must thy whole heart enjoy
From me, my Love, not one poor thought must stray,
For I have given thee all my heart away
But now prepare thy ears and eyes,
For I thy senses will surprise
Along with me, and thou shalt see
What Miracles in Love there be
[Exeunt
The Scene changes to the principal Street of the City, with vast numbers of People looking down from the tops of Houses, and out of the Windows and Balconies, which are hung with Tapestry. In this Street is a large Triumphal Arch, with Columns of the Dorick Order, adorned with the Statues of Fame and Honour, and c. beautified with Festoons of Flowers; all the Inrichments of Gold. Through this Arch, at a vast distance, in the middle of a Pi azza, is seen a stately Obelisk
Enter two Men
1. Man
What shouts are those that eccho from the Plain?
2. Man
The Stranger Princes have the Monster slain
The People the Victorious Champions meet,
And them with Shouts and Acclamations greet
1. Man
Our freedom these brave Conqu'rors have restor'd;
The bloud of Men no more shall be devour'd;
No more young Ladies shall be snatch'd away
To be the cruel Serpents prey
2. Man
For this the large Triumphal Arch was built,
For this the joyful People meet in throngs,
The Princes Triumph for the bloud they spilt,
And celebrate the Conquest with loud Songs
They in this place a Sacrifice prepare,
To pay their vows and thanks to th' God of War
[A Consort of loud Martial Musick
Enter the Priests of Mars, one carrying the Serpents Head upon the Spear, all of them having Targets, Breast plates, and Helmets of Brass. Then the Praesul, having a Trophy of Arms carry'd before him. Then Nicander, Po lynices, Cydippe, Aglaura, Train and Guards. The Priests sing this following Song, and dance to't
LEt us loudly rejoyce,
With glad heart and with voice;
For the Monster is dead,
And here is his head
No more shall our Wives
Be afraid of their lives,
Nor our Daughters by Serpents miscarry
The Oracle then
Shall bestow them on Men,
And they not with Monsters shall marry
Let us lowdly rejoyce
With glad heart and with voice;
For the Monster is dead,
And here is his head
Praesul sings
Great God of War to thee
We offer up our thanks and pray'r
For by thy mighty Deity
Triumphing Conquerours we are
Chor
Thou'rt great among the heavenly race,
And onely to the Thunderer giv'st place
Praesul
Jove is thy father, but does not exceed
Thy Deity on any score
Thou, when thou wilt, canst make the whole world bleed,
And then canst heal their breaches by thy power
Chor
'Tis thou that must to Armies give success,
Thou that must Kingdoms too with safety bless,
Thou that must bring, and then must guard their peace
They dance, striking their Swords upon the Targets, showing the postures of their Swords, Kettle-Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding: Whilst the Praesul and the rest prepare the Altar, and kindle the Fire. After the Dance—
Praes. sings
While we to Mars his praises sing,
A Horse, th' appointed Victim, bring
[Mars and Venus meet in the air in their Chariots, his drawn by Horses, and hers by Doves
Venus sings
Great God of War, if thou dost not despise
The power of my victorious eyes,
Reject this Sacrifice
My Deity they disrespect,
My Altars they neglect,
And Psyche onely they adore,
Whom they shall see no more
Have I yet left such influence on your heart,
As to enjoyn you wou'd take my part
By some known token punish their offence,
And let them know their insolence,
Mars
So much your influence on me remains,
That still I glory in my chains
What ever you command, shall be
A sov'reign Law to me
These saucy Mortals soon shall see
What 'tis to disrespect your Deity
To show how much for you I them despise,
Since they with Venus dare contend,
Ye powers of Hell your Furies send,
And interrupt their Sacrifice
[Mars and Venus fly away
Furies descend and strike the Altar, and break it, and every one flies away with a fire-brandin's hand
1. Pr
What dreadful prodigies are these!
Hence from his bloudy rage let's flie,
And in his Temple let us try
If we his angry Godhead can appease
Nican
What Magick Charms do this sad place infest,
And us in all our actions thus molest?
Polyn
The pow'r of Hell itsure must be
That thus against us wages war;
For when Fair Psyche we wou'd free,
It still does mischiefs against us prepare
But no Enchantment yet our courage binds,
No accidents can alter valiant minds
Nican
In spight of Hell we will go on in quest
Of our lov'd Psyche, who is charm'd from hence
Aglau
You might from all your fruitless toyls have rest,
If of your present fortune y'had a sense
Cyd
Our Father, who is now at point of death,
Does in his Will us two to you bequeath
Aglau
Envy it self will sure confess,
Our Beauties and our Vertues are not less,
Then the mean Idol's you so much adore,
And whom you never can see more;
The Monster you have slain did her devour
Polyn
We by his rav'nous Maw did find to day,
The Monster had not yet made her his prey
Cyd
What if he had, we two are left behind,
And by the Gods you are for us design'd
Nican
Heav'n has not yet to me reveal'd that mind,
My inclinations still are hers I find
The honour's great we might by you enjoy,
But it would all our vows and all our love destroy
Polyn
To Psyche I have offer'd my whole heart,
Sh'has for no other left me the least part
Pardon that I the honour must refuse;
No Mortals can their own affections chuse;
Love, Heav'ns high power does into us infuse
Nican
When we lost Psyche, solemnly we swore,
The search of her we never wou'd give o'r
Polyn
Should we not find her, we our lives must spend,
Which in th'unwearied search of her must end
Aglau
Think you with safety you shall us despise?
Though we're too weak to wound you with our eyes,
Our full revenge shall both of you pursue,
And give what to your insolence is due
Cyd
Your heads shall pay for the affront you give,
And you shall die, or we will cease to live
Nican
If danger cou'd our courages remove,
We were not fit t'aspire to Psyche 's love
Polyn
Our absence now you must excuse,
We in our search no farther time must lose
[Exeunt Nican. Polyn
Aglau
I have a trusty Villain which I'll send,
Who in disguise shall their unwary steps attend;
And then an ambush shall for them be laid,
That their base lives may be to us betray'd
Cyd
The powers of all this Kingdom we'll engage,
To sacrifice their lives to our insatiate rage
Aglau
They dearly shall by their example show,
How soon rejected Love to dangerous Rage can grow
[Exeunt amb •
ACT IV
The Scene is a stately Garden belonging to the Mag nificent Palace, seen in the former Act. The great Walk is bounded on either side with great Statues, Figures of Gold standing on Pedestals, and small sitting at their feet: And in large Vases of Silver are Orenge, Lemon, Citron, Pomegranate; and be hind Mirtle, Jessemine, and other Trees. Beyond this a noble Arbour, through which is seen a less Walk, all of Cypress-Trees, which leads to another Arbour at a great distance
Enter Aglaura, Cydippe, Psyche with her Train
Aglau
ENough the Splendor of your Court w'have seen,
Such ne'r was known by any earthly Queen
Cyd
But we your Conqu'ring Lover wou'd behold,
Of whom such charming stories you have told
Psyc
Oh! he's the brightest thing your eyes e'r saw;
Beauty he has might give the whole world Law
And then such tender kindness you shall see;
For he delights in nothing but in me
We sport and revel all the day,
In soft delights melting the hours away
And such resistless ways he has to charm
We kiss, embrace, and arm in arm,
With am'rous sighs, and soft discourse,
Our fainting passions still we reinforce
When I would speak, my words he does devour;
And when he speaks, I kiss him o'r and o'r
And wh •... from kissing we our lips remove,
He tells a thousand pretty Tales of Love
And all the while his beauty I survey,
And he so greedily beholds my eyes,
As he'd devour them. But a moment stay,
And he will you, as he did me, surprise
[Exit Psyche
Aglau
What cursed Fate is this, that did ordain,
That she shou'd have such pleasure, we such pain?
Oh that I had infection in my breath,
I my own life wou'd lose to give her death
Cid
Base Fortune! that on Psyche wou'd bestow
So vast a share of happiness,
And give her elder Sisters so much less,
That she shou'd be so high, and we so low
Aglau
Such glory yet no Monarch ever saw;
Such humble Vassals, such obedient awe,
Such shining Palaces yet ne'r have been,
Such pomp the Sun in all his progress ne'r has seen
Cid
A thousand Beauties wait for her command,
As many heavenly Youths are still at hand
And to our envious eyes she chose
These hated objects to expose
Aglau
When we to our great joy believ'd,
That she destroy'd had been,
Oh how the Ridling God has us deceiv'd;
We see her here like some immortal Queen,
Whom all her Subjects serve not, but adore
Cid
Oh! I shall die with envy: say no more,
But of some quick revenge let's meditate,
To interrupt their happy state
Let's by some Art cause fatal jealousies
Between these prosperous Lovers to arise
Enter Cupid and Psyche, with many Attendants
Aglau
They're here: What divine object strikes my eyes?
Cid
What heavenly thing does my weak heart surprise?
Aglau
Her hated sight I can no longer bear
Cid
Oh with what joy I could her heart-strings tear!
Aglau
This is the goodliest Creature Heav'n ere made;
And I will summon Hell up to my aid,
But I will Psyche 's life destroy;
And I will then this God-like Youth enjoy
Cid
When I am dead, he may be had by thee
But know, Aglaura, I'll ne'r live to see
This goodly thing enjoy'd by any one but me
Cup
Ladies—
You such a welcome in this place shall find,
As fits the greatness of your Sisters mind;
And by your entertainment I will show,
What I to my lov'd Psyche owe
For her shall Quires of Cupids sing,
For her the Sphears shall their loud Musick bring
SONG
LEt old Age in its envy and malice take pleasure,
In business that's sower, and in hoarding up treasure
By dulness seem wise, be still peevish and nice;
And what they cannot follow, let them rail at as vice
Wise Youth will in Wine and in Beauty delight,
Will revel all day, and will sport all the night
For never to love, wou'd be never to live,
And Love must from Wine its new vigour receive
How insipid were life without those delights,
In which lusty hot Youth spend their days and their nights;
Of our nauseous dull beings we too soon should be cloy'd,
Without those bless'd joys which Fools onely avoid
Unhappy grave Wretches, who live by false measure,
And for empty vain shadows refuse real pleasure;
To such Fools while vast joys on the witty are waiting,
Life's atedious long journey without ever baiting,
Now see what is to Psyche 's beauty due,
And what th' Almighty pow'r of Love can show
These senseless Figures motion shall receive;
Psyche 's bright beams can life to Statues give
[Ten Statues leap from their Pedestals, and dance. Ten Cupids rise from the Pedestals, strew all the Stage with Flowers, and fly all several ways. During the Dance, Cupid and Psyche retire
Cid
With what divine Magnificence
They in this place treat every sense?
Aglau
Excess of Love and Hate disturb my rest,
Which equally divide my breast
Cid
You may hate her, and other Princes love;
But your affection must from him remove,
Or th'utmost rage of a revengeful Rival prove
Aglau
Mountains shall sooner leap or fly,
The Sun may prove inconstant, but not I
All my presumptuous Rivals I'll destroy;
I cannot live, unless I him enjoy
Cid
Then suddenly resign your hated breath;
You shall not live to cause my death
Your fruitless Love shall soon be lost
You to your elder Sister shall give place,
For I will this Celestial Youth embrace,
Tho' it the lives of half the world shou'd cost
Aglau
The pow'r of Hell shall ne'r change my design;
I wou'd a thousand Lives before one Love resign
Cid
But Psyche 's Life and Love must have an end,
Or we in vain for him contend
What e'r against each other we design,
Against the common Enemy let's joyn
Aglau
Should we kill her, it would provoke his hate,
And on our selves pull down a certain Fate
Let's poison them with jealousie;
And Lovers had much better die,
Then suffer that extremity
Enter Psyche
Psyc
Now Sisters! how do you approve my Dear?
Cid
You are secure: but give us leave to fear
Psyc
Fear not: you are in my protection now
Aglau
We fear not for our selves, but you
Psyc
For me! I am so full of joy,
That nothing can my happiness destroy
I have my Love, and that's enough for me
My life is one continued Extasie
His love to me is infinite,
Each moment does transcend
Ages of of common gross delight,
For which dull sensual men so much contend
Cid
Why does he still conceal his name?
It argues little love, or else much shame
Psyc
You cannot doubt his love, he is so kind;
Envy in him no cause of shame can find
What need I care who 'tis I love
Since all that see him must my choice approve
Aglau
This violent Love may soon decay,
And he for some new Mistris may
Your easie heart betray
Cid
When he shall please to frown,
You from this heighth are suddenly thrown down
And when he thus shall have abandon'd you,
On whom will you inflict the vengeance due?
Psyc
Could I this fatal change survive,
I sure should be the wretched'st thing alive
Aglau
True Love has no reserve, this is some cheat;
Your wisdom's small, though your affection's great
Cid
Th'Impostor does by Magick Art surprise!
And this is all delusion of our eyes
The Miracles each moment does produce,
Sufficiently may make this clear;
Your Lover does no Natural Causes use
All Natures Order is inverted here
Aglau
You see that his Attendants are
The winged Spirits of the Air
He's sure some Demon, which commands the Winds,
And him the Clouds obey
How easily may he delude our minds,
Wh'our bodies can by Winds and Clouds convey
This must be some inchanted place
Cid
(aside.)
Let him be what he will, I'll him embrace
(To her.)
How soon may Fate your seeming Heav'n destroy,
Which like a dream reflects imaginary Joy
Psyc
Oh I am seiz'd with an unusual fright,
A sudden stop is put to my delight
Aglau
This still may be the Serpent you did fear,
Tho' with a humane shape he cheats your eyes;
And Heav'n by this more cruel will appear,
After this Joy to ruine by surprise
Cid
In wrath the Oracle thy doom declar'd,
Here no effects we of its anger fee
Thou know'st not yet what ruine is prepar'd;
What dreadful Fate Heav'n does reserve for thee
Psyc
How I'm amaz'd! Oh my poor trembling heart!
Enter Zephyrus
Zeph
My Lord commands your Sisters must depart,
And none must his commands deny
Aglau
What is't I hear! I dye, I dye
Cid
But if I die, I will not die alone;
She shall not here remain when I am gone
Aglau
Hold! take me with thee in thy brave design;
I'll in the noble execution joyn
[Both offer to stab at Psyche, a •... she looke another way, and a •... snatch'd away by Zephiri
Psyc
Ah! what unwelcome change is this I see?
Must they so suddenly be snatch'd from me?
Enter Cupid
Cup
Now let's enjoy our selves, the time invites;
True Love alone in privacy delights
What is't disturbs my Psyche 's mind?
What fatal change is this I find?
Such a black storm me thinks hangs on thee now,
As I have seen upon the Mornings brow;
Which blushing first had promis'd a fair day,
But strait did nought but dark-swoln Clouds display
Is it your Sisters absence makes you grieve?
All such relations you shou'd now forget;
Lovers should for each other onely live,
And having one another should have no regret
Psyc
So small a thing cannot afflict my mind
Cup
'Tis for some Rival then your griefs design'd
Psyc
This mean suspition proves my Lord unkind!
Ah! did your charms but to your self appear,
You'd know that I no other chains cou'd wear
No Rhetorick can paint my Loves excess,
Ere mine can be describ'd, it must be less
Cup
I love thee too at such a rate,
No Mertal can approach my height
What is it can produce thy grief?
Psyc
I fear you'l not afford it your relief
Cup
If thou by any thing my wrath cou'dst move,
'T wou'd be by thy suspition of my love
Thou o'r my heart art grown so absolute,
That no commands of thine I can dispute
Thou of thy pow'r know'st not the large extent;
To ease thy doubt, make an experiment
Psyc
No: I shall find a harsh repulse, I fear
Cup
By thy victorious eyes,
Which govern now the heart they did surprise;
By th'Gods inviolable Oath I swear,
By Styx, all thy commands shall be to me
Sacred, as Heav'ns decree
Psyc
I with these am'rous vows am doubly pleas'd,
I am of half my grief already eas'd
By this all fear of coldness you remove,
And then you'll tell me now, who 'tis I love
Cup
Heav'n!
[Starts
Psyc
'Tis fit that I who did great Kings refuse,
Shou'd know who is the charming Youth I chuse
Cup
What do I hear?
Psyc
'Tis true I love, and glory in my chains;
But to compleat my joys, it yet remains,
That thou, my Love, wou'dst thy dear name expose,
And my illustrious choice to me disclose
Why dost thou frown? thou must my doubts secure,
I by my Love and by this Kiss conjure,
If thou dost love me, this assurance give
'Tis Love, my Dear, makes me inquisitive
Thou shou'dst all secrets to my breast resign,
Besides, th'hast sworn this is no longer thine
Cup
I've sworn; and, if you will, I must comply
But then thy fatal curiosity
Inevitably ruines Thee and Me
Psyc
Is this my Sov'reign Empire over thee?
Cup
You must what e'rs within my power command;
But your extravagant desires withstand
Unless you will abandon him you love,
And will for ever from my sight remove
Psyc
You found a heart too ready to believe,
And wou'd you still that poor weak heart deceive?
Cup
Must I my fatal secret then resign?
Psyc
Can you keep back your heart, and yet take mine?
Cup
Consider yet what 'tis you do
Psyc
I fear'd I shou'd be thus refus'd by you
Cup
Let me not yet my name declare
Psyc
Oh unkind Youth! thou mak'st me now despair,
That thou'lt reward my love, or ease my care
Cup
Consider yet, and let me hold my peace
Psyc
Will your unkind denials never cease?
Cup
Know then, my self a God I must declare,
Whom all the other Deities obey
All things in Earth, Hell, Water, Air,
Must to my Godhead their devotion pay
I am the God of Love, whom, to thy cost,
Thy foolish curiosity has lost
By this thou dost my Love to Anger turn,
And must in fatal desolation mourn
I from thy once lov'd eyes must fly;
For 'tis ordain'd by cruel destiny,
Which rules o'r all the Gods and me,
That for thy folly I shou'd thus abandon Thee
Cupid flies away. The Garden and Palace vanish, and Psyche is left alone in a vast Desart, upon the brink of a River in Marish, full of Willows, Flags, Bul rushes, and Water-flowers; beyond which is seen a great open Desart
Psyc
Oh! whether art thou fled, my Dear?
Why hast thou left me here?
Of all my glorious pomp I am bereft,
And in despair am in a Desart left
Oh my misfortune! Oh my crime!
I lov'd a God, and was ador'd by him
My self I banish'd, and am left forlorn,
A fatal subject of injurious scorn;
A scorn to all the Princes I've refus'd,
By my own folly I my self abus'd
Yet sure the God is much unkind,
To fly himself, yet leave his power behind
My Love remains still to increase my Care,
And heighten all the torments of Despair
[Psyche retires to the River side
Enter Aglaura, Cidippe, with a Souldier
Sould
We of your Royal Father are bereft,
Who you the heires of this great Kingdom left
So much he for the loss of Psyche griev'd,
That he by death his fatal grief reliev'd
Aglau
But are not yet the Rival Princes slain?
Sould
We have not follow'd your commands in vain;
The Princes are in sight upon the Plain
In quest of Psyche they each path will trace,
And their unwearied search will bring them to this place
So many of us here in ambush lie,
As soon as they approach us, they shall die
Cid
Be gone, we largely will reward your loyalty
[Exit Souldier
How luckily did Zephyras convey
Us to this Desart, where we may,
To our great pleasure, standing by,
Behold these insolent Rivals die
Aglau
Since of all hopes of Love we are bereft,
Revenge is all the pleasure we have left
Oh my bless'd eyes behold you face;
Psyche is thrown upon this desart place
Cid
With pleasure I my sufferings embrace,
Since her an equal sufferer I find
Is all your splendid Pomp to this declind?
Fate did your Pallace to a Desart turn,
And you for all your arrogance shall mourn
Psyc
Am I the object of my Sisters sooth?
Ah, had I there your fatal ever ne'r see,
I still had prosperous in my Pallace been
You urg'd that curiosity,
Which brought this dreadful ruine upon me
Aglau
How well did our first Artifice succeed,
She like a Prince when he's depos'd should bleed
Cid
Under our power you now a Slave remain;
Our Father's dead, and has left us to Reign
Psyc
No: a more glorious Fate for me's design'd,
Since he is gone, I'll not stay long behind
Aglau
She shall not if she wou'd;
We to be safe must shed her bloud
Cid
Her with her Lovers Heads we'll first surprise,
Then to our rage her life well sacrifice
[Exit Aglaura and Cidippe, s •... iling o •... Psyche
Psyc
No longer these misfortunes I'll endure;
Of all such wounds, death is the sovereign cure
In this deep Stream that softly by does glide,
All my misfortunes and my faults I'll hide
[She offers to throw herself into the River. The God of the River arises upon a seat of Bulrushes and Reeds, leaning upon an Urn. The Naiades round about him
The God sings
STay, stay, this act will much defile my Streams
With a short patience suffer these extreames
Heav'n has for thee a milder Fate in store,
The time shall be when thou shalt weep no more
And yet fair Psyche ne'r shall die
1. Nymph
She ne'r shall die
2. Nymph
She ne'r shall die
Chor
She ne'r shall die
But shall be crown'd with Immortality
But shall be, and c
The God sings again
Venus approaches, from her anger flie;
More troubles yet your constancy must try ▪
But th'happy minute will ere long arrive,
That will to you eternal freedom give
And yet fair Psyche ne'r shall die
1. Nymph
She ne'r shall die
2. Nymph
She ne'r shall die
Chor
She ne'r shall die
But shall be crown'd with Immortality
But shall be, and c
Psyc
I need not fly, I have done no offence,
I'm strongly guarded by my Innocence
Venus descends in her Chariot
Ven
Dares Psyche before me appear?
From my dread wrath you scorn to flie
'Tis Impudence, not Constancy
I'll bend your stubborn heart, and make you fear
Psyc
Dread Goddess! how have I
Provok'd so your unwonted cruelty?
Venus
You did usurp my Honours, men to you ▪
Did give that Worship which to me was due
For you they did my Deity despise,
And wou'd have rais'd up Altars to your Eyes
Psyc
Is Beauty then (Heav'ns gift) a fault in me?
It is a fault I cannot help, you see
Ven
Your Pride did first all Earthly Kings refuse,
And then my Son, a God, must chuse
How durst you thus my heavenly Race abuse?
Psyc
Against all Kings he harden'd my poor heart,
And for himself he struck me with his Dart
His Beauty wou'd make hearts of stone to melt;
And his almighty power your self have felt
Ven
Dare you with me expostulate?
I'll make you feel the worst effects of hate
My pow'r you fatally shall know,
And for your insolence to Hell shall go
[Venus flies away
Enter Nicander and Polynices
Nican
How long shall we our search pursue,
Without all hope that we shall Psyche find?
Polyn
Each day our weary labour we renew,
And all our life must be for that design'd
Nican
What happy Vision does salute my eyes!
Polyn
It must be Psyche 's face that can so much surprise
Nican
At length the joy of both our lives is found;
Blest Fate! that brought us to this sacred ground!
Polyn
Oh Divine Psyche! you're at length restor'd;
We will defend you now from future harms
Nican
Now we have found the Goddess we ador'd,
We will protect her against all Hells charms
Psyc
Oh come not near, Heav'n does not me restore;
I have committed an unknown offence,
For which I must be snatch'd from hence,
And, Princes! I shall never see you more
[Furies rise, and then descend with Psyche
Nican
Oh cruel Fate!
Polyn
Oh my curst Stars!
Enter Soldier
Sould
Fall on, fall on—
Enter Souldiers, who lay in ambush, and fall upon the Princes, who kill four or five of them, the rest fly
Nican
This from the envious Sisters must proceed
Polyn
'Tmust be their stratagem to make us bleed
Nican
Why should we thus our lives defend,
Since Psyche we've for ever lost
Polyn
'Tis fit our hated lives should end,
But not that Slaves shou'd of the victory boast
Nican
I am resolv'd I'll not this loss survive
Polyn
Nor shou'd you think I am so tame to live
Nican
Let's hand in hand go plunge into the deep,
There all our sorrows may for ever sleep
Polyn
Agreed: and our immortal Souls shall that way go,
And meet our much lov'd Psyche down below
[They arm in arm fling themselves into the River
Enter Aglaura and Cidippe, with Souldier
Aglau
Villain, what Cowards did you entertain,
That two weak men could not by you be slain?
Cid
Oh Heav'n! the Princes are with Psyche fled
Base Slave! thou hast forfeited thy head
[Souldier runs out
Cupid descends
Cup
Oh envious Fools, that Psyche thus pursue!
You both shall soon a deserv'd vengeance find;
Hells everlasting pangs to you are due,
Since she is gone, you shall not stay behind
'Gainst Psyche you provok'd my Mothers rage,
And your destruction must my wrath asswage
When from below my Psyche shall return,
You with damn'd Spirits shall for ever mourn
Arise ye Furies, snatch 'em down to Hell
No place becomes such envious Hags so well
[Aglaura and Cidippe sink
ACT V
The Scene represents Hell, consisting of many burn ing Ruines of Buildings on each side: In the fore most Pieces are the Figures of Prometheus and Sisy phus, Ixion and Tantalus. Beyond those are a great number of Furies and Devils, tormenting the Damn ed. In the middle arise; the Throne of Pluto, con sisting of Pillars of Fire; with him, Proserpina; at their feet sit Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus. With the Throne of Pluto arise a great number of Devils and Furies, coming up at every rising about the House. Through the Pillars of Pluto 's Throne, at a great distance, is seen the Gate of Hell, through which a Lake of Fire is seen; and at a huge distance, on the farther side of that Lake, are vast Crowds of the Dead, waiting for Charon 's Boat. The following Song is sung by Furies and Devils
TO what great distresses proud Psyche is brought?
Oh the brave mischiefs our malice has wrought!
Such Actions become the black Subjects of Hell,
Our great Prince of Darkness who e'r will serve well,
Chor
Must to all Mortals, nay, Gods shew their spight,
And in horrour and torments of others delight
How cool are our flames, and how light are our chains,
If our craft or our cruelty Souls enow gains
In perpetual houlings and groans we take pleasure,
Our joys by the torments of others we measure
Chor
To rob Heav'n of the Fair is our greatest delight,
To darkness seducing the Subjects of Light
How little did Heav'n of its Empire take care,
To let Pluto take the Rich, Witty, and Fair
While it does for it self Fools and Monsters preserve,
The Blind, Ugly and Poor, and the Cripple reserve
Chor
Heav'n all the worst Subjects for it self does prepare,
And leaves all the best for the Prince of the Air
[A Dance of Furies
Cidip
Some ease they find i'th'midst of pain,
When Hell does a new Subject gain
Aglau
But in the hottest flames this sight would please,
And Psyche 's houling will our greatest torments ease
Cid
Were mine the hottest Furnace of all Hell,
If she were there, my flames I could bear well
Aglau
Were I into some dreadful Cavern tost,
Where the Damn'd are bound in eternal Frost;
Where gnashing teeth and shuddering they lie,
Cursing their births, wishing in vain to die
To see her there would warm my icy chain,
And her extreme damnation thaw my pain
Cidip
But Oh our Hell is yet to come!
With horrour I expect my doom
Aglau
There our eternal Judges are,
By their stern looks of mercy I dispair
Psyc
Does my too criminal Love deserve this pain?
Circl'd with horrour must I here remain?
Through thousand terrours I have been convey'd,
With dismall yellings, shricks and groans dismay'd
O'r troubl'd Billows of eternal Fire,
Where tortur'd Ghosts must houl, and ne'r expire
Where Souls ne'r rest, but feel fresh torments still,
Where furious Fiends their utmost rage fulfil;
Tossing poor houling Wretches too and fro,
From raging Fires into eternal Snow
From thence to Flames, from thence to Ice again,
In these extremes th'encounter equal pain,
And no refreshing intervals can gain
The cursed Fiends still laughing at their moans,
Hugging themselves to hear their shricks and groans;
Upbraiding them with all their Crimes on earth
Each miserable Ghost curses in vain his birth
Encompass'd with these horrours round
No beam of comfort have I found
Oh cruel Venus! wilt thou ne'r relent?
Canst thou of Love such an Example make?
Can Love deserve such punishment?
Oh cruel God, thus to forsake
Me at the moment when I need him most!
I fear he is for ever lost
I could endure the horrours of this place,
Could I again behold his much lov'd face
Pluto sings
REfrain your tears, you shall no pris'ner be;
Beauty and Innocence in Hell are free
They're Treasons, Murders, Rapes and Thefts that bring
Subjects to th' infernal King
You are no Subject of this place,
A God you must embrace
From Hell to Heaven you must translated be,
Where you shall live and love to all eternity
Proserp
Psyche, draw near: with thee this Present take,
Which given to Venus, soon thy peace will make
Of Beauty, 'tis a Treasury Divine,
And you're the Messenger she did design
Lost Beauty this will soon restore,
And all defects repair
Mortals will now afresh her Beams adore,
And ease her mind of jealousie and care
No Beauty that has this can e'r despair
Pluto
Here are your Sisters, who your life once sought
Their malice to this place has Psyche brought,
And against her all these dire mischiefs wrought
For ever here they shall remain,
And shall in Hell suffer eternal pain
But Psyche shall a Deity embrace
Proserp
Be gone, fair Psyche!
Pluto
Be gone, fair Psyche!
Both
Be gone fair Psyche, from this place!
Chor. of all
For Psyche must the God of Love embrace
For Psyche must the God of Love embrace
Aglau
O mercy, mercy, Sister, we implore;
You'll intercede for a reprieve
Cidip
No more our malice can fair Psyche grieve;
You'll be a Goddess, we must you adore
Minos
No grace for you she shall obtain,
For you must here remain
Yet for her sake we'll ease you of some pain
No raging pangs of sense here you shall know,
But must eternal labours undergo;
And with the Belides for ever live,
Still shall wish death, but never die;
Each of you must draw water in a Seive
To all eternity
[The envious Sisters sink, with all the Devils and Furies, and the Throne of Pluto vanishes
Psyc
In vain, poor Sisters, I deplore your Fate!
Though living you pursu'd me with your hate
'Tis a dark Cloud upon my happiness
But I ll strive to forget what's past redress
Were't not for this, my Joys I could not bear
Immoderate joy would overthrow,
Were it not ballasted with care
My Love! I shall enjoy thee now,
Together we shall happy be,
And live and love to all eternity!
Enter the Ghosts of Polynices and Nicander
[Psyche starts
This was a dismal Tragedy
These are the Princes Ghosts we see
Oh what sad chance has brought you down to me
Nicand
We felt the extremes of love and grief,
Which never cou'd have found relief
And hand in hand we plung'd into the deep,
To seek repose by deaths last sleep
Polyn
Since you were lost, to ease us of our care,
We both obey'd a generous despair
For since we could not live for you,
Our miserable lives we could not bear
To all th'insipid World we bad adieu,
Since nothing that remain'd could please us there
Nicand
Death we enjoy'd, and heavy life remov'd,
For we in death behold your charms again
Those charms which both in life and death we lov'd,
Which we had sigh'd and wept for there in vain
Psyc
Poor Ghosts! why would you suffer for my sake?
In vain too was your death design'd,
Now I no recompence can make;
And then by force I was ungrateful and unkind
Could I have lov'd, your merits were so much,
Your equal greatness and your vertues such
I ne'r had fix'd my choice on one of you,
But must eternally have waver'd betwixt two
[She weeps
Nicand
Who would not willingly resign his breath,
Who by a glorious death,
The honour of your tears might gain?
Polyn
I cannot now of Fate complain,
Nor would with tedious fools above remain
Nor can your pity now or love implore
Since you from hence must mount above
And must embrace th'all pow'rful God of love,
And at an humble distance we must you adore
Nicand
Nor can we you of cruelty accuse,
Who for a God all mortal Kings refuse
Polyn
Farewell: our Destiny recalls us now,
And we t'immortal happiness should go,
If without you it could be so
Psyc
Stay, Princes! and declare where, and what it is,
This everlasting place of Bliss?
Nicand
In cool sweet Shades, and in immortal Groves,
By Chrystal Rivulets, and eternal Springs;
Where the most beauteous Queens and greatest Kings,
Do celebrate their everlasting Loves
Polyn
In ever peaceful, fresh, and fragrant Bowers,
Adorn'd with never fading Fruits and Flowers;
Where perfum'd Winds refresh their heat,
And where immortal Quires their Loves repeat
There your great Father we have seen,
Where he afresh enjoys his beauteous Queen
Nicand
Who did for hopeless Loves themselves destroy,
Are there the greatest Hero's far;
Your God with infinite and endless joy,
Rewards their meritorious despair
Polyn
Each moment there does far outgo
The happiest minute Earthly Lovers know
With soft eternal Chains of Love combin'd,
There they are ever youthful, ever kind
Their endless pleasure is all Extasie,
And not like Earthly Joys, disturb'd with care;
Each fruitful minute does new pleasures bear
From all unwelcome interruption free;
Each moment there more pleasure is design'd,
Then mortal Lovers can, when first united, find
Psyc
'Tis fit that you those glorious Crowns should wear,
Of Friends and Rivals, the unequal'd pair
Nicand
The splendid Crowns of Lovers we've receiv'd,
But are by Heav'n of you bereav'd
Strangers to Love we are alone;
Our Love is up to Adoration grown
Our hours in contemplation we'll employ,
Of the transcendent glory which you share;
Our am'rous sighs shall turn to holy pray'r;
While we that Friendship, which you made, enjoy
Polyn
For ever without you we must remain
And now we must no longer stay,
Lest we contribute to your pain,
And your immortal happiness delay
Farewell for ever, and remember me
Nicand
Farewell for ever, and remember me
[Ex. Nic. and Pol
Psyc
Farewell! such Friends and Rivals ne'r were found
How much am I by Love and Honour bound?
[Exit Psyche
The Scene changes to the Marish which was in the for mer Act
Enter Psyehe
Psyc
These Lovers must for ever in my thoughts remain;
And would for ever give me pain,
Did not the thoughts of him my mind employ,
Who'll banish all my cares, and will compleat my joy
But ah! my sufferings have transform'd me so,
My decay'd face and languid eyes;
My ruin'd Beauty He'll not know,
Or if he does, he will my looks despise
But I have here a Sacred Treasury,
Which all my ruines may repair;
Since it can make Venus her self more fair,
Is't an offence if it be us'd by me?
[She opens the Box
Oh! what dark fumes oppress my clouded brain!
I go, and never shall return again
Farewell, my Love, for ever fare thee well
[She swound •
Cupid descends
Cup
Love o're my anger has the victory gain'd;
Thy pardon is at length obtain'd
Thy dangers and thy sufferings I have known,
My Love has made them all my own
With thee I languish'd with thee did complain,
With thee I sigh'd and wept, and suffer'd all thy pain
Why dost thou hide thy conqu'ring eyes?
Dost thou a Lover and a God despise?
Open thy pretty eyes, I am still the same,
I still retain my unresisted flame;
And all my vows are still paid to thy sacred name
She's, she's dead! O whether art thou gone?
O Tyrant death! what has thy bold hand done?
O cruel Mother! whose insatiate rage
Could thee against such innocence engage?
Thou hast by this all ties of duty broke;
No longer I'll endure thy yoke
My filial duty to revenge shall turn,
You soon shall feel what to my pow'r you owe;
With hopeless Love you shall for ever burn,
Your unregarded pains no ease shall know
You still shall rage with love, and to despair shall bow
Venus descends in her Chariot
Ven
What insolence is this I hear?
This from a Son I can no longer bear
Resume your duty, and put on your fear
Cup
Duty to her, who has made Psyche die?
Revenge shall piety succeed,
Revenge shall make your cruel heart to bleed
And by your torments you shall find that I
Am much the greater Deity
Ven
Sure the great Thunderer asleep does lie,
Or does not hear this blasphemy
Cup
My pow'r can make the Thund'rer bow;
You all the dire effects of it shall know
For thee, dear Psyche, full revenge I'll take,
And of my Mother first I'll the example make
What hellish rage provok'd you to this deed?
Whom Monsters would have spar'd, you have made bleed
Ven
You suffer'd her my glory to invade;
And when I call'd Apollo to my aid,
You did the fraudulent God suborn ▪
For you he that ambiguous Riddle made,
And promis'd judgment did to mercy turn;
And by that Oracle I was betray'd
Now to deceive me is beyond his power,
Not all his Art can make her live one hour;
For none but I cou'd Psyche 's life restore
Cup
Can you? Oh do, and punish me;
If there were any crime, 'twas mine,
For her I'd lose my immortality
Oh give me her, I'll all my power resign
Here take my Quiver, take my Darts;
You when you please shall rule all hearts
You shall the power of Love to that of Beauty joyn
Ven
Psyche and you have so provok'd my hate,
Your pray'rs as soon may alter Fate
Cup
Behold the all-commanding Deity,
[Kneels
An humble suppliant on his knee!
Look on my Love! can you this form destroy?
Oh my lov'd Psyche! Oh my onely Joy!
Oh give me her! my duty I'll retain,
Your Son for ever shall your humblest Slave remain!
Ven
I must be gone, you sigh and beg in vain
Cup
Oh hear my pray'rs! do not my tears despise;
Behold the humble offerings of my eyes
If ever yet true grief y'ave felt,
Your Marble heart will at this object melt
Ah think what pity to your Son is due!
Think but what wonders he has wrought for you!
How many hearts he has wounded for your sake!
Remember this, and then some pity take
Ven
No more for her will I neglected be,
Nor will I be afronted more by thee
I'll be reveng'd on all your insolence,
And with eternal death I'll punish her offence
Cup
Oh cruel Murdress! I will take her part,
And will revenge my self upon your heart;
Against your breast I'll sharpen every Dart
You in despair shall languish and decay
Those feeble charms y'have left shall fly away
Languid shall be your looks, and weak your eyes,
Your former Worshippers shall your faint Beams despise!
No Lover more youe'r shall gain,
I will be deaf, when ever you complain;
Without Love's pow'r, all Beauty is but vain
Its seeming Essence Beauty does derive
Onely from the reflection which Love makes
Like that—
Which from reflected light a colour takes
The Body does no being to it give
Tremble at my revenge, for well you know,
What I by my resistless pow'r can do
Ven
Farewell you insolent and daring Boy
A living Psyche you shall ne'r enjoy
[She mounts her Chariot, and flies away
Cup
Oh cruel Mother! do not fly;
Oh think how great must be that misery,
Makes an Immortal Being wish to die
Spight of my self I must for ever live,
And without her eternally must grieve
You I conjure by all the heavenly Race,
By all the pleasure of each stoln embrace;
By the most ravishing moment of delight
You ever had, free from your Husbands sight,
By all the joys of day, and raptures of the night,
Return, return
[Venus being almost lost in the Clouds, Cupid flies up and gets into her Chariot, and brings her back
Do but my Psyche 's life restore,
And I will never ask you more
Do it, and all your pleasures I'll renew,
And add a thousand which you never knew
Ven
At length your sad complaints have soften'd me—
Psyche shall live—
Cup
Oh Heav'n!
Ven
But not for thee;
Nature returns, and I forgive my Boy
Restor'd you her shall see, but never shall enjoy
Cup
What dreadful words are these I hear!
Jupiter appears upon his Eagle
But lo! the mighty Thund'rer does appear,
To him your cruelty I will reveal
To the great Iupiter I now appeal
Soul of the World, I beg you'll do me right,
Against my savage Mothers rage and spight
Iup
Goddess of Beauty, you must gentle grow,
And your severe Decree recall;
T'almighty Love the Universe must bow,
And without him must to confusion fall
On Earth no Prince, in Heav'n no Deity,
Is from his pow'rful Scepter free
Do not the God of Union provoke,
Lest Heav'n and Earth feel his revenging stroke
Should he the utmost of his rage employ,
He might the frame o'th Universe destroy
Ven
Should he a Mortal for his Wife embrace,
And by this hated Match blemish my heavenly Race
Iup
Psyche to him shall equal be,
She is no Mortal, she shall never die;
For I will give her Immortality
Ven
This puts a happy end to all our strife
Psyche, arise: from seeming death return,
And with my Son enjoy immortal life,
Where you shall ever love, and never mourn
[Psyche revives
Psyc
Who is it calls me from deaths silent night,
And makes me thus revisit light?
Oh Gods, am I again blest with thy sight!
Cup
For ever both your Godheads I'll adore,
Who did my Psyche to my arms restore,
Nor Hell nor Heaven shall make me quit thee more
Psyc
Do I again view thy Celestial face!
Cup
Do I again my Dear, my Love embrace!
Iup
Come, happy Lovers, you with me shall go,
Where you the utmost Joys of Love shall know
Amongst the Gods I Psyche will translate,
And they shall these blest Nuptials celebrate
In honour to them, I will summon all
The pow'rs of Heav'n to keep a Festival
The Scene changes to a Heav'n
In the highest part is the Palace of Jupiter; the Columns and all the Ornaments of it of Gold. The lower part is all fill'd with Angels and Cupids, with a round open Temple in the midst of it. This Temple is just before the Sun, whose Beams break fiercely through it in divers places: Below the Hea v'ns, several Semicircular Clouds, of the breadth of the whole House, descend. In these Clouds sit the Musicians, richly Habited. On the front Cloud sits Apollo alone. While the Musicians are descending, they play a Symphony, till Apollo begins, and sings as follows
Apollo sings
Apollo
ASsemble all the Heavenly Quire,
And let the God of Love inspire
Your hearts with his Celestial Fire
The God of Love's a happy Lover made,
His ravishing delights shall never fade
Chorus of Apol lo's, followers with Flagellets and Recorders
With his Immortal Psyche He
Now tastes those joys which ought to be
As lasting as Eternity
Apollo
Come, Lovers, from the Elizian Groves,
And celebrate these heavenly Loves
[A Symphony of Pipes, then Enter six Princes of Elizium, with six Ladies
Apollo
Bacchus with all your jolly Crew,
Come revel at these Nuptials too
[A Symphony of Hoboys: then enter Bacchus, with the Mae nades and Aegipanes
Apollo
Come all ye winged Spirits of the skies,
And all ye mighty Deities
[A Symphony of Recorders. Cupids and Spirits descend, hanging in the Skies, Gods and Goddesses in Chariots and Clouds
Apollo
You all his humble Vassals are,
And in his joy should have a share
Chor
With his immortal Psyche he
Now tastes, and c
1. Elisian Lover sings a Treble
On Earth by unkindness are often destroy'd
The delights in the Nymphs who are so much ador'd;
Or else the poor Lovers by kindness are cloy'd,
So faint are the pleasures their Love does afford
2. Treble
With sighs and with tears,
With jealousies, griefs, and with fears,
The wretched poor Lover is tost,
For a few moments pleasure his liberty's lost
3. Treble
How short are those moments, yet how few they employ!
Ah how short! ah how short is the joy!
2. Treble
Ah how short! ah how short is the joy!
1. Treble
Ah how short! ah how short is the joy!
Chorus of three Trebles to the Recorder, Or gan, and Harpsi cals
Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below,
And in Heav'n each Godhead to Cupid does bow;
But Love, Love, was ne'r perfect till now
[A Symphony of soft Musick of all the Instruments. Then Iupiter descends in a Machine, with Cupid on one side, and Psyche on the other. Then a Dance of six Elizian Princes gloriously habited
Mars sings to a Warlike Move ment
Behold the God, whose mighty pow'r
We all have felt, and all adore;
To him I all my Triumphs owe,
To him my Trophies I must yield
He makes victorious Monarchs bow,
And from the Conqu'ror gains the Field
Chorus to Trum pets, Kettle Drums, Flutes, and Warlike Musick
He turns all the horrours of War to delight,
And were there no Love, no Heroes would fight
[A Returnello by Martial Instruments, and c
Mars
Honour to Battel spurs them on,
Honour brings Pow'r when War is done
But who would venture Life for Pow'r,
Onely to govern dull Mankind?
'Tis Woman, Woman they adore;
For Beauty they those dangers find
Chorus to War like Musick
No Princes the toyls of Ambition would prove,
Or Dominion would prize, if it were not for Love
[A Returnello again
Bacchus
The delights of the Bottle, and the charms of good Wine,
To the power and the pleasures of Love must resign
Though the Night in the joys of good Drinking be past,
The debauches but till the next Morning will last
Chorus to Ho boys and Rustick Musick of Ma •... des and Aegi panes
But Loves great Debauch is more lasting and strong;
For that often lasts a man all his life long
A Returnello again
Bacchus
Love and Wine are the Bonds which fasten us all;
The World but for these to confusion would fall
Were it not for the pleasures of Love and good Wine,
Mankind for each trifle their lives would resign
Chorus
They'd not value dull life, or would live with-out thinking;
Nor would Kings rule the World but for Love and good drinking
A Returnello again
Apollo
But to Love! to Love the great union they owe;
All in Earth and in Heav'n to his Scepter must bow
A general Cho rus of all the Voices and In struments. The Dancers mingle with the Singers
All joy to this Celestial Pair,
Who thus by Heav'n united are
'Tis a great thing, worth Heav'ns design,
To make Love's Pow'r with Beauty's joyn
[Six Attendants to the Elizian Princes bring in Portico's of Arbors, a dorn'd with Festoons and Garlands, through which the Princes and they dance, the Attendants still placing them in several Figures
Iup
For ever happy in your Psyche be,
Who now is crown'd with Immortality;
On Earth Love never is from troubles free,
But here 'tis one eternal Extasie
'Mongst all the Joys which Heav'n and Earth can find,
Love's the most glorious object of the mind
EPILOGUE
WHat e'r the Poet has deserv'd from you,
Would you the Actors for his faults undo,
The Painter, Dancer, and Musician too?
For you those Men of skill have done their best
But we deserve much more then all the rest
We have stak'd all we have to treat you here,
And therefore, Sirs, you should not be severe
We in one Vessel have adventur'd all;
The loss, should we be Shipwrack'd, were not small
But if it be decreed that we must fall,
We fall with honour: Gallants, you can tell,
No Foreign Stage can ours in Pomp excel,
And here none e'r shall treat you half so well
Poor Players have this day that Splendor shown,
Which yet but by Great Monarchs has been done
Whilst our rich Neighbours mock us for't, we know
Already th'utmost they intend to do
Yet all the fame you give 'em we allow,
To their best Plays, and their best Actors too
But, Sirs—
Good Plays from Censure here you'll not exempt,
Yet can like Farces, there below contempt
Drolls which so course, so dull, sobawdy are,
The dirty Rout would damn 'em in a Fair
Yet Gentlemen such stuff will daily see;
Nay, Ladies too will in the Boxes be
What is become of former modesty?
Yet—
Best Iudges will our Ornaments allow,
Though they the wrong side of the Arras show
But Oh a long farewel to all this sort
Of Plays, which this vast Town can not support
If you could be content th'expence to bear,
We would improve and treat you better ev'ry year
FINIS
