Canonical Title: PYRRHUS KING OF EPIRUS
Requested Title: PYRRHUS KING OF EPIRUS
Authors: Charles Hopkins
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_pyrrhus-king-of-epirus-_hopkins-charles_1695
Item Title: Pyrrhus king of Epirus, ... 1695
Item Creator: Hopkins, Charles.
Item Year: 1695
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: PYRRHUS KING OF EPIRUS
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_pyrrhus-king-of-epirus-_hopkins-charles_1695/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_pyrrhus-king-of-epirus-_hopkins-charles_1695_djvu.txt
—_—  __ 


ls. Petfond. 


Pyrrhus, King of Epirns. 
Helenus, -.. Soato Pyrrbus.- , 
Dion, His General. + 
Antigonuz, King of Macedon. 
Demetrius, gon to Antiponus, _ 
Ariſteon, - Sontothe late Py. 
rant of Argos, 
ZEmilius, A Roman. 
Martius, Another Roman. 
W O M E N. 
Lanaſſa, & Queen of Epire. 
Antigone, Daughter to the 
King of Macedon. 
Ptolemy, | The dead Son of 
Pyrrbas. 


Ghoſt of Alexander the Great 


PYRR HUS 


P Y R N.. ON US$ 
Kingof EPIRUS. 


 ACT:4:$01NES 


© 


SCENE, TheCity of Argos befieged by King Pyrrhus; 
the Camp of the Epirotes on the one fe, and that of the 
Macedonians, who came to the Relief of it, on the other. 


\ Pyrrhus Solus. The Time Night. [Thunder and Lightning. 


Pyrrb, I F Heaven is wont to mourn the Death of Princes, 
And Gods above are ſenſible of Grief 
For their Vicegerents here : If Nature fickens, 
And looks with ſad Concern, when impious Fate 

Strikes at her Darling Sons 3 if Groans of Ghoſts, 

That leave their empty Tombs to ſtalk on Earth, 

- And ſcream in opeu Air, are juſtly call'd 

The Voice of Fate, that of the King of Macedon, 

Or mine, is near at hand 3 for all the Prodigies, 

And all the Horrors, thati fore-run the Funerals - | 

v1A : B Of 


2 Pyrrhus- King of Epirus, 
Of dying Heroes have been ſeen to light, 
Approach my General, why ſo ſlow a March ? [ Dionentring, 
Why dwells that mournful Cloud upon your Brows ? 
Why look you. more opprelt with Grief then Yeors, — 
As all the Anger, and the Frowns of Heaven, HOLM 
And the loud Tumulr of a troubled Sky, 
Could bend a Heart made firm with Age, like yours ? . 
Dijon. No, Royal Sir, not theſe outragious Tempeſts, 

Not maſly Bolts teach'd by\the brawny Gyclops,, 
Hot from the flaming Forge, and driven by Fove 
Through the {corch'd Skies, can ſhock your Souldier's Soul : 

> Bat oh ! imagine Prince what moſt would move you, 
Drive yor touRage, make yourfatfogt with Fate, 1 

wy =" 3» ry - » - ® ; , > > 1 
4 Cov y thing do this, 5 #* © - $ | 

It EPA loſs of LH a hana: Overthrow-+. 

From an inglorious Enemy. | 

Dijon. You've loſt more. 

Much more than this. 

Pyrrh. There is but one that can-be ; | 
And if my Queen be ſafe, not ſlain, nor ſeized © © 1 
By thoſe that forc'd Her from Her Throne. in Epirus, 

I dafe the utmoſt Malice of my Deſtiny. Rs. 

Dion. She's ſafe, and coming on apace to ſeek you : 
Our outmoſt Scouts deſcry'd her glitt'ring Chariot, 
Drawn by /white Steeds, that rart as ſwift as Wind ; 
And long before that riſking, Sun appear 
With his ful Orbof Light above yon Hill, 

You'll ſee her in your Tent. 

Pyrrh. Then be ic as it will, a, 1 | 
Thou might'ſt have told at firſt, and not have fear'd : 

It wonld not overwhelm me. 

Dion. To him that loves, the loſs of his Belay'd; ; 
Is Miſery enough; and to the Warriqur, | 
Who ſeeks in bloody Fields for Fame and Glory, 

An Overthrow is yet a greater II]: 

But for a Father to loſe a Princely Sonz  }. 
And ſuch a Son as Prolemy, ſo like his. Father, 
Outweighs all other IIls. | -- 

Pyrrh, Alas, I thought not 
That Fate would wound me+there. 

Dien, Would it had ſtruck at any other, Life, 


Fa.,veY 


* 
. 


— 


Any 


ee ed EE EE A ny 
» 


Pyryhins King" of Epitus. 3 
Any but yours 3 my Breath I had reſign'd 
With Joy, and laid my Boſom naked for a Javelin. 
Now all the Soldiers hang their drooping Heads, | 
Which late they bore 2lvft 3 they bresk their Launces, 
And cry, No more to War, the Prince is gone 
That taught us how to conquer 3 no more to Battles, 
Since He. who won them for us is no more. 
Pyrrh. If they grieve thus, ſure he was well betov'd, 
And died as did become hirn. 
Dijon. He fell ſo brave, 
No Hiſtory can produce the like Example, 
And no Tongue dareto ſay Fl! ſhew his Equal. 
Pyrrh. Stop not : Say on, my Soldier. 
Dion.- Sir, 1 dare not; 
His Praiſes but renew the ſad Remembrance, 
And I would ſpare your Sorrow. / 
Pyrrh, No, go on, 
I bear it as | ſhould do. 
Dion. When joyful Sparta ſaw your Tents took up. ** 
And all your Camp remov'd, fix gave a Shout 
That eccho'd to the Skies; fierce Prolomyrag'd 
To hear their Boaſts, and loytring with ſome Troops 
Far ſeparate from the of your Army, 
The Force of Lacedemon 1allied on him, 
And yet he ſcorn'd to ſhun the unequal Combat, 
"Twas then that he employ'd his utmoſt Strength, 
- Performing more than Man, none ſcap'd unhurt, 
From his ſtrong Arm : His fingle Sword flew more, 
Than thoſe of all the Combarants beſides. 
W hat could he do, by Multitudes oppreſs'd? 
At length he fell, high on a heap of Spartaw, 
Whom himſelf kill'd, and ſmil'd, and look'd in Death, 
As who ſhould ſay I conquered. 
. Pyrrh, One thing more, 
And then eternal Peace be with Him. Tell me, 
Who got his Body? | | : 
Dion. His Soldiers all fought round it. * 
When word was brought me of the fierce Engagement, 
I gather'd all the Forces next at hand, 
and flew to reſcue him; but all too late, 
I only could revenge him, which 1 did; 
For thouſand Spartan Ghoſts took flight that day » 
B 2 ) 


AS Se ode Rt nt i 
. ' * , 


4  Pyrchus King. of Epirus. 


To wait on his. 
Pyrrh, Why yet 'tis well. | 
He was a Soldler, and he died as ſuch, 
As ſuch he ſhall be buried, ,” See im brought, hither, 
That we my pay him all the Rites he merits 
From a juſt King, and an indulgent Father : 
And ſince Revenge and Rage inflame my Breaſt, 
I vow to all the Earth, by all the Gods, ;, 
By all the Furies that are kindfed in me, _ \ 7 
To Night to lay him in his Tomb in &gos..... 1 


Dion goes out , and, returns with Soldiers bearing in the Prince. 


Dion. See here, my Lord, behold your hopes lie blaſted, 
Your Darling gone, firſt of thy Royal Off-ſpring, 
And moſt reſembling thee. Whom have we now, 
When all thy youthful Vigour ſhall be ſpent, 
Thy Arms grown tir'd with wielding of the Sword ? 
When old Age ſhall encroach, and ſeize hy. 1-ypÞS, 
Compelling thee to ſit at home in quiet ?, 


Who then ſhall lead thy Armies to the Batte] 
And. conquer in thy-Cauſe? Who then ſhall fight | 


As thou haſt done without the loſs of Glory, 
That the deluded Foe ſhall find no difference ., | 
'Twixt him and Thee? Who thea ſhall bring-frelh Laurels. 
To crown the aged Temples of their King ? © 

Pyrrh. Ceaſe, good old Man, ceaſe this unmanly. Grief, - 
Leſt I mourn too ; 1, who would brave the Fates,. 
And riſe beneaththe weight of all their. B2Its. | | 
Spezk Comfort to me, urge me to Revenge, | 
And drive me to the Field ; Aqgd yog,. bis SYdiers, 
Take up your Prince, 4nd bear himto his.Tent, 
Attend his mournful Hearſe with weeping Eyes, 
Till the loud Trumpets ſend their Notes to Heaven, 
Till the Drums beat to Battel, and the big Voice 
Of Vengeance calls you forth ;, then ruſh to Arms. 
Learn to forget your Griefs in heat of Combat : 

Remember nat you ſaw your Leader dead 

But fight as if he conquer'd at your Head. 

Djon, Shall we go arm our ſelves, my Lord. 

Pyrrh, We will, 
The early Sun climbs o'er the Hills apace, 

| His 


Pyrrlius King of Epirus. 
His Beams are darted upward to the Heavens 
And the firſt God that wakes, puts forth his hand. 
To draw alide the Curtains'of the Skies, © 

And let the day light out. How many Thouſand 
That riſe this dreadful Morn, all gay and healthful, 
Muſt e'er it yet be Noon lie down again, 

And reſt for ever. Call the Athenian Min'ſtrel, 

I want ſome Muſick: 'Let me have that Song 

Sung at the Royal Banquet, made in- Babylon” 

The laſt great Feaſt of Alexander, 


S Q'N. G. 


Ark ! the big Drums they beat to Battel, 

| The Voice of War is loud as Thunder. 

Hark ! How the Claſhing Armours rattle, 
And lo ! the Squadrons marching youder, 


Now, now they meet, the Word is given, 
The Shields are lifted, Swords are drawn ; 


The Shouts of Warrioars rend the Heaven, 
And every Chief comes raging on. 


Hundreds fall, and Thouſands yield, 
Blood and Slaughter fill the Plain ; 
And Fate Triumphant through the Field, 

Coloſlus-like, beſtrides the Slain. 


The Buſmeſs of the World diſpatches, 
decided thus in ſome few hours, 

Death quickly ends the vanquiſh'd WWretches, 
And Laurel crowns the Conquerours. 


Emer an Officer, 


D40n. Is the Queen coming ? And ſo near at hand! © 
By Mzrs ſhe's welcome, though the firſt of the Sex - 
That e'er was ſo to me. My Lord, the Queen 
Is in the Cainp, will you not go to meet her ? 


Pyrchus King: of Epieus: 
Pyrrh, How, wy Queen! Dion, ſee, ſhe's here already. : + 
Emo the Gabwec.cc 1's 2 Luis win” OT 
Oh! I am the laſt in Love, as well as Honour. THYSE 
Welcome my Love, by thy dear Self, a Welcome, 
. Great as the Man that loves like me, can give. | {\ 
No Mother, that has mourn'd her long loſt Infant, .. / | 
Rejoices half ſo much to find her Darling, /, ' 10/0 © 
Or view the lovely Babe wich half the Fagdneſs. . | 
Ll look on thee. Fol 
' Queen, Anſwer me, Gracious Heaven, 

What God has ſaved my Pyrrhw yet unhurt, 
Even in the Mouth of Slaughter? What kind Deity, _Þ 
With a ſtretch'd Arm, held the broad Shield before him, 
+ py to Deſtiny, Does he ſtill live? 
And do 1 live to claſp him? 

Pyrrh.. 1 live my Love, 
And ſure I ſhall not dye now thou art come, 
My better half of Life. | 

Queen, But yet | fear, 
Leſt Heaven at laſt grown weary of its Favours, 
Should ſullenly withdraw its bounteous hands : 
And Fortune that has wound ſo many Victories 
In one round and conſtant String, 
Should raſhly in a Pett unravel all, | 

Pyrrb, What greater Proof could I deſire from Heaven | 
Of its continu'd Goodneſs, than thus to ſend thee, s 
The Omen of my Conqueſt ? Sure ill Fate - 
Durſt never yet aſſume a*ſhape ſo lovely, 
Or put on Looks like thine. | 
| | woo Alas, my Lord, 
Methonghts I met it with a dreadful Aſpect. 
Late as | lay entranc'd, I ſaw you, Pyrrhus, 
Far different, far unlike what now you are. 
| thought 1 ſaw you ſtretch'd upon the Earth, 
All pale, and ghaſtly, and your gaping Wounds 
Sxill freſhly bleeding : ' All che mangled Bodies 
Of your defeated Army, in heaps beſide you. 
No more that awful Warriour, whoſe Name alone 
Has (hook the vaſt Foundations of the Capitol. 
I ſaw you, -oh my Pyrrbus, cold and dead, 


6 


Pyrrhus King of Epirus. Ev 
That lovely Face beſmear'd with Blood, thoſe Lips 
Faſt clos'd for ever, had not power to anſwer 
To the loud moan I made you; Oh ! my Lord, 
How was | daunted at a ſight ſo diſmal ? 
I almoſt died to have dreamt it, and unable 
To bear the horrid Vigon any longer, 
I burſt the Chains of my diſtratted Sleep. | 
Pyrrh, *'T was but a Dream caus'd by your tender Fears. 
en, Yet by thoſe Fears, 
And by the Love [ bear you (and oh! if Heaven 
Loved half ſo well, it would be kind and conſtant) 
My bleeding heart begs of you not. to fight, 
But inſtantly to raiſe the faral Siege ; 
For ſomething tells me with a dreadful Whiſper, LET. > 
Epirus ne'er ſhall ſee her Monarch;more. 
Pyrrh, How art thoy /alter'd;; Love, ſince firſt I knew thee ! 
Thy Spirit once was Maſcyline and Brave ; 
Thy ſelf wer't wont to.help me to my Arms, 
And Bid me haſten to the Glorious Field ; 
And when I talk'd of War, the Tale would pleaſe thee 
As much as that. of Love, What now: haschang'd thee ? 
Queen. | am not ug'd to fear ; yet ſomething bodes, 
I know-not how, - nor what; and [ conjure you 
By all I have heard you ſwear, by all your Sighs, 
By all your Vows, deferr the great deciſion ; 
And if 1 ever had the Power to move you, 
O let me charm you now, or now-or never. 
Pyrrh, Oh! hold my Love, ceaſe the unkind requeſt, . 
I can deny you nothing ; yet | beg 
You would not ask me what I muſt not grant. 
You ſhou'd conſult my Honour more than thus ; 
When all my tow'ring Thoughts were fix'd on Glory ; : 
W' hen all the Languiſhings. of Love were fled, 
And Mars alone had fill'd, and fwell'd my Breaſt, 
Thus with thy Tears to cool my heated Soul, 
To tura me back from the bright track of War, 
And melt me down again to Woman's Fondneſs. 
Queen, Then kt it melt this obſtinate heard heart: 
- Thus willl fold thee in wy Jonging Arms, 
Embrace thee thus ; thus ſhalt thou liſten to me : - 
Thus, whilſt | hang upon my Pyrrkus's neck, 
What loud Alarm of Drums, or. what fhrill Trumpet ? 


What 


8 Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 
What dreadful roar of War ſhall charm him from me? 
Pyrrh, Why doſt thou preſs me thus? Forbear-to urge me, 
To drive me on, and force me to deny thee: 
Not fight Lanaſa! What Requeſt but this 
Could [ refuſe thee? This I cannot! grant. - 
Oh what, what would the murmuring Soldiers ſay, 
Already rangd, preparing for the Fight, | 
They wait my coming : Should | not haſte to head them, 
How would they ſtorm to ſee themſelves abandon'd ? 
Queen, Enough, my Lord, | PETS} 4 2 F 
| have heard m_—_ and am at laſt convined 7 
My Tears aredry'd, and all my Prayerv are ended, | 
No more will-l puſh back your Coming-Glory, 
Nor ſtrive to crop your growing Wrenths of Lawrel:; 
Go then, my Pyrrhus, go, and fight, and proſper, 
Lead your impatient Squadrons to the Field} - 
| Rear all your Standards, let your warlike Enfigns 
Looſe all their golden Streamers.to the Windy, ' £ 
Kuſh to the War, may Conqueſt crown your Arms, 
And your triumphant Garlands-flonrMh ever// © —-/ 
Pyrrb, It (hall be Battel now 5 '#nd, by yor Hieav'n, 
It ſects auſpicious, that my Love l1as ſaid '[ A 
| thank thee for the Conqueſt 44 and'methinks '' 
Already | behold Artrigonus vanquiſhed, 
Oh! Hadſt not thou, my better Self,” been willing, 
Had you not ſpoke it, had your Aſſent been "wanting 4 
I had not fought with half my uſual Bravery y OO 
But now, Whole-P,rrbus pours upon the Fde, | 
And fights with Forces not divided now; | 
Queen, Yet grant me this, my Lord, my much lov'd Pyrrhus, 
You muſt not, ought not ro deny me this : + 
Swear to me by your '/Honour, by your arms, 
By all the Oaths a Soldier holds as Sacred; 
Swear ſomewhat to enliven your fainting Queen, 
That when the dreadtul Tug at laſt begins, 
When the laſt Trumpets urge you to the Battel, 
And Arms and Heads are lop'd, and ſhivering Launces, ' ' 
Sharp'Spears, and all the Darts of Death fly round you, 
When all your drooping Soldiers fall-in Heaps ; 
And the tall Youths thar ſtood bnt now erect, 
Lye breathleſs on the Plain, ſwear then, my Love 
To guard your own dear Life as much as poſlible, 


To 


Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 
To ſeek no Dangers Prudence bids = ſhun, 
And Glory will permit, and not ruſh wilful 
Into the Arms of Death. Grant me bur this, 
And half my Fears are vaniſh'd. 
Pyrrh. No _ | grant you this , but ask no more. 
Retire, my Love, I hear the ſhouting Soldiers 
Cry for their Chief, and my old General yonder 
Is come to call me hence: ! go to rea 
The Noble Harveſt of a bloody Field, 
Whoſe Crop hal] all be thine, 
Queen, Succeſs attend thee, 
And all the mighty Gods of War and Love 
Take part with thee, guide, and dire@t thy Arms, 
And Heav'n reſtore thee to me, 
Pyrrh. One Embrace, 
Such as the Queen of Beauty gave to ſure, » 
When he march'd forth to the Overthrow of Giants 
In the Phlegrean z and doubt not, Love, 
| go to Conqueſt as aſſured as his 
And will return more glorious to thy Arms, 
 Andbring new Trophies to thee, 
When after drawn in thy triamphant Carr, 
Thy ſelf the beauteous Goddeſs of the War 
Whilſt Kings (hall walk in Fetters by thy fide, 
And even the Conqueror's Self before thee bleed 
Whilſ all my Wreaths thy lovely Temples bind, 
Andall the Laurel-Crowns I won are thine, - 
And all by Crowning thee become divine. 
From ev'ry part ſhall vanquiſh'd Princes come z 
Thon ſhalt | pwn the Royal Captive's Doom, 
Each Vaſſal ſhall bow down his fappliant Knee, 
And all the Earthreceive their Laws from thee. 
{ Leads her out, and returns. 


Enter Helenus. 


Hel. My Lord, the Enemy 
Have all their Forces ready, and their Trumpets 
Have ſounded twice to Battel. | 

Pyrrh. Did not ours ſound ? 
As often, in anſwer tothem ? 


wo. Pyrchus wi of Epirus. 


Dion. They did: 
Our Men are ww in order $99 Ee” 
We only wait for the third fo hem 5 2 
Then ſound on our fide too, an mart meet then, 

Pyrrb, We'll ging them the ejrd 45 they 


Not ſtay to take it frop The. = al, | TrupRgs 
So loud a Blaſt, thak Heay'g'and 4h May hear yg, jo 
What Order is Arntigonus's Army In 
Hel. Himſelf at the Head of 
The Romans marching foremolt. 
Pyrrh, Helenus, you have loſt a Princely Brother, 
His Spire be infuſed in thee, his Fires 
Added to thine, with all gby Eorce revenge him; 
Fight in his Cauſe, as he has done in thine, 
And be a Prolomy to me. 
Dion. Heaven _— him like 
In all things, bug his end. 
Pyrrh. Hark, we are anſwer'd. CTxampers ſornd, 
Now they begin to march. | 
Dijon. By Heav'n, in DOE 
Rome's Legions, and the Macedonian Flory 
Are rang'd in Noble Diſcipli 
Hel. Methinks we mgye liks Clouds beneath the Sky, 
Driven by the breath 9 Wi $ aur Fire's caperal d 
Until we come ſp Rear _ meet, and ſtri 
And then the Lightning follows. 
Pyrrh. My Blood boils high, - 
And all my Sinews ſtretch themſelygs for War.: 
Draw all, and follow with. your. Sword, 
Strike for the Revenge, let Pig/emy bethe Ward: 4 
Send loud defiance forth. from every Breath, Ns 
'And wound as ſharply, and as ſure as Death. [ Eatunr. 


his Auxiliaries, 


ACT 


Pom——y 


Pycrhus King of Epitus; mM 


Acrt IL 


Enter Antigonus, Demetrius, Ariſteon, Martius. 


i Pyrrhus then invincible, and does the Fortune 
Of Alexander wholly wait on him ? 
He marches as ſecurely on to Battels, 
| As others do to Trinmphs, and he wins them, 
As ſure as if he were a God, exalted 
Above the Chance of War. 
Dem, He is the Darling of it, 
The beſt-loy'd Son of Mars ; our Mactdonians 
That once knew how to conquer, fly from him 
As Perſians did from them. 
Mart. My two beſt Legions 
Are loſt entirely, and the reſt ſo ſhatter'd, 
They are not ſerviceable. Imperial Rome, 
In the wide Progreſs of her ſpreading Arms, 
Has never met ſuch ſtops as now ſhe finds, 
When e'r ſhe encounters Epirus's King. 
Antig. All his Succeſs is wonderful, himſelf 
Does things prodigious, and beyond belief : 
An Army led by fuch a King, fo daring, 
That goes the foremoſt on, and fights the firſt, 
With his own Sword, opening the way to Vitory, 
Muſt needs prevail. 
Arift. 1 ſought him in the Battel, 
And found him to my Coſt; his ſecond Blow 
Struck me to Earth, ſo weightily, that 1 fanſy'd 
All Heav'n was fall'n upon me. 
Dem. I ſaw him then, 


When he rode ſwiftly through your Argive Troops, 
As fatal as the Lightning, and as faſt, 
And diftributing Deaths like Fove himſelf. 

Antig. Now we lie here beſieg'd, ſhat up in Walls, 
And have not Forces left to take the Field, 
'Tis doubtful if theſe Ramparts can withſtand him, 


Til 


C2 


12 Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 
Till Succours ſhall ariſe. | 
Arift, Argos to him | my 
Will be as Oxydrate to Alex ahder ; > 
Yet Victor as he is, we will reſiſt him, 
' And put the War on the extremeſt Proof, 
When he dare try it. 
Dem. That will be to Night 3 
For | am told he ſwore to interr his Son 
In the Goddeſs Jun0's Temple. | 
Mart. No doubt he'll a&t 
As boldly as be vows. 
Antig. 'Tis almoſt certain 
_ He will aſſault-us here this very. Night, 
The Trumpet that we ſent him is return'd 
Buc Truce 1s only granted till the Night, 
And that ſpeaks ſomething, 
Dem, The Gates are open'd, | 
And the glad Argives walk about in Fields, 
Where an hour ſince it had been Death to tread 3 
Already they begin to taſte the breath 
Of the refreſhing Peace. 
Mart. Soldiers on either ſide, 
That very lately fought with mortal hatred, 
Now join in friendly Meetings. 
aArift, Yonder | think, 
Two of a nobler AſpeCt than the reſt, 
Seem to come ſtrait tous; I know their Arms, 
The ſame the Prince and General wore in Battel. 
Antig. When you are met, I charge you to be careful 
How you obſerve the Peace ; let nothing break it. 
No Words inrage yov, and no Rage tranſport you 
To violate our Truce;z but when it ends, | 
Appear your ſelves again, reſume your Fury 
Fiercer than ever z Summon all your Forces 
For one great blow to crown the dreadful Upſhot. 
Prepare th*extremeſt Chance of War to try, 
Reſolve to copquer, or reſolve to die. [Exit Antigonus. 


Enter Heleaus, Dion, 


Dem. Much ſweeter are the looks of gentle Peace 
Than thoſe of horrid War. . | 


Pyrrhus Xing: of Epirus. 
Mel. One of them | 
Looks like ſome Beauty in her beſt attire, 

With all her richeſt Ornaments upon herz © 
The other like ſome rough and uchewn Warriour, 
Clad in hard Iron, 


Mare, Not long ſince it was'dangerous-for the beſt of -us 


To meet ſo near : We now may join our hands, 
And claſp each others warlike Arms unhurrt ; - 
Which was not ſo this Morning. 

Dion. And will not be this Night. 


Ariſt. Short as you pleaſe, we are ready to receive you. 


Dem, Till then all Peace, huſh'd as the Sea becalm'd ; 
For ſo ſhould we look now : No angry Frown 
On our ſmooth Brows, no Fury in our'Eyes, 
= Nothing of Enemy in us. 
_  #ll. By Mars lam pleasd 

That we meet thus. | 
Ariſt. The Conquerors may be pleas'd, 
 Andproud on't too, and chiefly ſuch as take it. 
A kind.of Triumph to them, 
| Dion, Wetake it not as fuch, 
Although we are the Conquerors. 

Ariſt, When you've won all, you may. 

Hel. Ardall is Ours 
To very little. 

Dem. Leſs than that little we have; 
Has oftentimes been known to bring back all. 

Ariſt. Argos is ours, a formidable City, 
The Walls are large, and high, and Menwithin them 
That dare defend them. 

Hel. And there are thoſe without 
As daring to aſſault them. 

Dijon, And you have prov'd, 
They are not to be ſcorn'd ; this day 1s witneſs + 
To the great Fall of Thirty thouſand Soldiers 
Of Argos, Rome, and Macedon, and they lie yet 
Unburied in theſe Fields. | | 

Dem. Heav'n was againft us : 
But the next time Fortune may ſmile on our ſide, 
And lop a greater number of your Armies 
Than we loſt from ours. 


14 Pycchas King of Epirus: 

Ariſt, to Helens, And Prince | tell you, : 
Whilſt [ wear this, and whillt theſe hands can wield it, 
You ſhall not be a Conqu'rour. | 

Hel, 'Tis a large Promife | 
More than a ſingle Sword can e'er perform. 

I ſaw yours drawn to day with thouſand athery 
As able as it ſelf z yet through them all 
We found the way to Victory. |, 101 

Ariſt. Yet there is a Quarrel | 
We muſt decide our ſelves, when not an Eye 
Is by to ſee us, nor a hand to hinder, 

There thou ſbalt not be Victor; 

Hil. Name it to me, 

And be aſſured thou ſhalt be met. 

Arift. Antigone, 

Hel. Ha! wbat of her? 

Ariſt. She never ſhall be yours. 

Hel. Who ſhall hinder ? 

Ariſt. 1 will. ' 

Hel. You cannot, dare not do's. | 

Ariſt. By Heav'n, I can and dare; nay more | will, 
Think where ſhe is, in..1rgos, ina Place 
Where | have Pow'r, where thou ſhalt never come ; 

And now deſpair. 

Hel. Were Argos Walls as high 

As huge Olympas top, their taw'ring Battlements 


 Hidin the Clouds, and reaching up to Heav'n, 


A.Love like mine would find a ſpeedy way 
How to furmount them. 
Ariſt. 1 laugh at thee. 
Hel. Thou dareſt not, 
Not for thy Life : Oh! Love. 
Ariſd. You ſee I do. 
Hel, But thou ſhalt end it with thy Love and Life, [Both Draw. 


' All three deſtroy'd at once. ( Ariſt, worded, 


Dion. Ha, Sirs, in time of Truce, is this like brave Men? 
Help to diſarm them. Prince is this the Honour 
You do your Father's Name? When he makes Peace, 


- Are you the firſt to break ie ? 


Hel. Had he been by, 


Or Fove with all his Thunder in his hand, ay 
I had acted as | did: | 


Pyrrchus King of Epirus. 
Dem, Both of the Kings are diſobey'd alike - ' 
By both the Princes ; but no more of this, 
Suſpend your Fury only till the Night, 
And you may then. diſcharge it all with Honour 
Each on his Foe, + 
Dion, And I promiſe, Prince of Argos, 
Helenus ſhall not then decline the Combar, 
Although he ought got to purſye it now. 
Hel. By Heav'n VII ſeek thee in the mouth of Death, 
On top of all thoſe Ramparts, which thou faid'ſt 
I ne'er ſhou'd climb, and hurl thee down as Fave 
Did Giants from the Skies, 
Ariſt. Remember this, | | 
Hel. I will, or curſe me Gods.; make me the Scorn 
And Sport of every Coward, if I not ſeek thee, 
And carefully as Fate, that ſurely finds: 
In War and Love may I be never bleſt, 
And may ſhe loath me whom I love the beſt. 


[Exeunt Demetrius, Ariſteon. 


Manent Helenus, Dion, 


Hel. 'Tis yet ſome Comfort that I know my Rival; 
Which known he dies. I'll after him, and end him: 
Too certainly he loves her, and perhaps 

. She may love him ; ſhe.may, (he is a Woman, 

"A Sex that may be falſe : The impiaus, Thought 
Almoſt diſtratts me : I'll go learn the Truth. 
General, farewel, 

Dijon. Ha! Whither go-you, Prigge.? 
That is-the way to Ages. 
Hel. Il goto boa 
Dijon. W hat, to a City-in.an Enemy's bands ? 

Beleagur?*d by our Selvesja Hoſtile Town: 

That wou'd be greedy of ſo rich a Prey, 

And ſure to keep you Priſoner. Come, by Heay'n; 
You ſhall not go. | ; 

Hel. By Heay'n, you ſhall not hinder, 

And therefore let me paſs. 

Dijon, I barr you thus,, *. 

And will not give you way» ' 

Hel. Say not again you will not z 

Far.l will have it. . 


Dion , 


16 Pyrchus KintY Epirus. 


Dios. | were mad my ſelf 
If I gave way to Mad-men. 

Hel. Old ſtubborn Man, as impotent as envious, 
Were not thy Vigour gone, thy Veins grown dry, 
And every drop of ſprightly Blood exhauſted, 
And can'ſt not meet my Arms-with equal Forces, 
I would puniſh thee for this. 

Dion, Oh! that thou wert not Son to God-like Pyrrhas, 
The Man [ love of all the World the beſt, 

And even above it all, and next to Heay'n, 
This aged Arm, and withered as it is, ; 
Could I make cruſh the Man that dares to tempt it. 
Hel, Do you know me ? 
Dion. Aye, better than you do your ſelf, 
And love you more. 
Hel. You ſeem not to do either. 
Remember I'm Heir to the Epiran Crown: 
Long may my Father wear it ; but when he dies, 
If t ſurvive, 'tis mine, and thou eſteem'd 
No other than a Traytor. 

Dion. Thou'rt worſe, | 
A Traytor to thy Father, and hy King z 
And Ruine to thy ſelf. 

Hel. Yet let me paſs. | 

Dion. Your Actions have enraged me ſo of late, 

That what you do, does not concern me now. 
Go where you pleaſe; for [ will to the King, 
And tell him all. 

Hel, Tell what thy Malice can, | 
Perverſe old Dotard, paſt the Years of Manhood.” 

Dion. Thy Father ſhall know what thou are, A'll tell him 
How you firſt broke the Truce 3 how in the Battel, 
When | had fingled out the King of Macedon, 

And held my Sword advanc'd abave his head 
Ready to ſtrike, and put a happy end 

To the Long War, | 
You ruſh'd betwixt, and ſtopp 4d my falling Arm, 
And cry'd out, Spare the King. 

Hel. In that 1 did 
Nothing, but what was due to Royal Blood 3 
Kings are too ſacred, and too dear to Heav'n 
To fall by impious hands. 


A 


Pyrchus King of Epirns: 


Djon. You lov'd the Daughter, 
And therefore ſav'd the Father. Curs'd Love, 
The bane of gallant Deeds and gallant Men : 
Good Gods ! that any one ſo form'd for Greatnefs 
As this moſt excellent, but — Prince, 
Deſign'd by Heay'n for all imperial Dignities, 
Caſt in the nobleſt Mold, and ſtamp'd divine, 
No Fault through all his Frame, the beſt of Princes, 
And braveſt Soldier, ſhould be loſt by Loye, 
Remember but your Brother Prolerny, | 
Your Royal Father wiſh'd yon were like him, 
And oh! 1 bzg of all the Gods you were. 
Would he do this, would he forſake his Honour, 
And leave a conqu'ring Army for a Woman ! 
O think what pains I took to inſtrutt your Youth 
In the great Trade of War, and how I joy'd 
To ſee the noble Art improv'd in you; 
Then call the old Man, Dotard, paſt his Manhood, 
Thank me in Terms like theſe. 

Hel. Forgive me, General, 
Shame and Diſtraction ſeize me both at once. 
I know not what to ſay ; alas, I know not 
What I reſoly'd to do, you've held a Mirror, 
And ſhewn me to my ſelf, and I am foul 
As She I love is fair. 

Dion, Return with me | 
Back to our Camp, and all again is well ; 
Where you ſhall meet in Triumph all the Chiefs 
Shining in Golden Arms, the Prancing Steeds 
Bearing with Pride their Riders on their Backs, 
And neighing to the ſonnd of Warlike Trumpets, 
Whilſt all the joyful Soldiers loudly anſwer 
In Songs of 1s Par. | 

Hel, How little ſhall I ſhare the general Joy, 
That have the Foe within me. Do but view me, 
And think that when a Conqueror grieves as | do, 
Even whilſt his Arms ate on him, and his Sword 


Still ſRtain'd with Blood, nothing but Love cou'd cauſe it. 


Dion, 1 ſee it plain you love her too, too well : 
But Glory us'd to be the charming Miſtreſs, 
And moſt admir'd by Princes; flight not that 
For any other Idol, 
D 


hi 


Atl. 


18 Pyrrhus King of Epirus.. 
Hel. Heav'n can witneſs, 
That tho' | love her more, far more than Life, 
Yet | love Honour better than them both. 
Dion. Why did you then go to throw that away, 
Even when you were not certain of the other, 
And raſhly run ro-'Dangers which had coft you 
Your Life and all ? 
Hel, O do not preſs. me thus ; 
My guilty Soul wou'd loſc the black Remembrance, 
But you take care to keep it ſtill alive. | 
Don. No, it ſhall die for me; and ſince l ſee you. 
So ſenſible of Honour, ſo nice of that, | 
In heighth of Love | will my ſelf inftru& you 
To farther your Deſigns.  -% 
Hel. Oh tell me how,. 
My good General, tel! me, and your Prince 
Shall bleſs thoſe aged lips that gave the Counſel. 
Di1on. See her no more, | 
Hel. Again you daſh me 
Down from the top of my aſpiring hopes. 
Into the loweſt Valley of Deſpair. 


Dion. Nay, hear me out ; not ſee her till the Night :- 


To Night, when your great Father bids us arm, 
And march to mount yon Walls 3. then you ſhall go 
The foremoſt on, to ſeize your lovely Prize, 
Revenge your Brother, and receive Antigone. 

Hel. Oh! you have fired me; by the Gods, I with 
The Night already come : Fall down thou Sun 
From Heav'ns high Battlements, to Seas beneath ; 
And the kind Heav'ns draw all yaur darkeſt Curtains 
Around your ſhining Orbs, and ſhut in day , 
For | will do ſuch moſt amazing Deeds, 
As are not fit for your bright eyes to view. 
Yon Argos ſhall be levell'd in the Duſt, 
Flames in her Tow*rs, and Murder in her Streets, 
Death in all Forms, and horrid in them all; 
Only my Love be free, in general Ruine, 
Whom I will bear ſafe through th'wondring Flames, 
Whilſt the ſcorch'd Dzmons of the Air ſhall beg 
For ſuch a Champion to relieve themſelves. 

Dion. Prince, I dare truſt you farther yet than:this; 
I know you truly noble; only ſwear, 


a 


Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 

That if I let you go to her you love, | 

As you may do diſguis'd in time of Truce, 

Swear to return when the firſt Trumpers call, 

And the Alarm is heard z not loſe your Part 

In the great Action, ſwear by ſomething ſacred, 

Aud you have leave to go. # | 
Hel. By all that's ſacred, 

By her | love, I ſwear | will return, 

Though from the claſping Arms of her | love. 
Dion. Remember only this, and then farewel : 

Behold yon Ramparts higher than the reſt ; 

'Tis there your Father ſtorms, be ſure be there. 
Hel. Doubt not | will, only tilFthen adieu. 

I go with none but lambent'Fires to love; 

Burt will return with burning heat to Battel, 

And all my riſing Spirits turn'd for Glory. 
Glory and Love uſurp my raviſh'd Soul, 
They have my heart, and they poſleſs it whole. [Exv. 
Dion. 1 let him go, and yet Heav'n knows how loth; 

But had I not, his noble Heart had broke. 

Hes brave, and worthy of his Royal Birth ; 

And were it not for Love, the moſt accomplifh'd, 

And neareſt to a God, of any Mortal, 

Penurious Heav'n, and ye fo timorous Deities, 

That dare not ſuffer this one gallant Youth 

To be compleely perfect, leſt he draw 

Your Adoration from you; no, you dare not 

Grant your Aſſent, that ought of Humane Race 

Shou'd ev*'ry ways be happy ; then alas 

He were too like your ſelves ; What other blemiſh, 

But that of Love has tainted him? Woman, Woman, 

W hence comes your Empire over us ? Whence the Power 

That chains us all your Slaves? Sure we at firſt 

Were meant the Maſters; but by ſome ſtrange turn, 

Some moſt prodigious Whirl of unfix'd Fate, 

The ſubtil Sex has chang'd the Laws of Heav'n. 

Heav'n, when it made them, meant them to obey, 

Deſign'd them Slaves, who now have learnt to ſway : 

To them the Hero's of the Earth fal] down, 

Pleas'd when they ſmile, but dying if they frown : | 

To them we offer up our frequent Prayers ; 2 F 


. 


They move above our Heads in higher Spheres, 
And the large Rule of all the World is theirs. - (Exit, 
D 2 __ a0 3 


20  Oyrrhns King of Epirus. 


$017 At Uoows Tt 


. Bnter Ariſteon with Antigone. 


_ Avift W Hat Pleaſure could a tender Soul like yours 


Receive from-looking on the diſmal Objects 


Thoſe Fields afford ? - . 
Artig. That wretched one of Pity. 
FAriſt. Shou'd-I have ſhar'd your Pity, lovely Princeſs, 
Had 1 lain there high on the fatal -heap, 
Th'epmoſt of th'Dead? 
Amtig. No doubt you ſhou'd: | 
I mourn for ev'ry gallant. Man that falls, 
Serving his King and Country, 
Arift. How much more ſhou'd you monrn me ? 
I, who ſerve none þut you ; | 
1, who am ſubjett ta no King nor Country, 
Whom no Ambition, no Deſire of Glory,. 
Drives to the Field,. no Luſt of Sovereign Power, 
But only your Defence has drawn my Sword. 
Oh ! give me now the Pity that I beg, 
Now while I live, to ſave me from'the Death 
You ſay you'd mourn. | 
Antig. I do not ſee you need it : 
You have my Father's Thanks, the Army's Praiſes 
That might ſuffice a Soldier. | 
Ariſt. Oh ! Antigone, 
There is another Name would make me prouder, 
Than Soldier, Chief, or Conqueror. 
Antig. The laſt of thoſe | 
Might have been ſpar'd ; for you maintain it ill. 
Arift. No wonder that the Viftory was not ours, 
Since you, nor wiik it were, nor pray'd it ſhould be, 
How ſhould our Arms prevail ? 
Antig. How dare you to tax me 
With that Impiety? I wiſh'd the War 
Were at an end ; 1 wiſh'd as did become me. 


=_ 
\ 


Pyrrhus Kay of Epirus. 21 


Ariſt. Oh! Madam, if I duyſt explain your meaning, 
Which of the Armies was your chief Concern, 
And which you offer'd up your Prayers for moſt ? 

It ſhould be that you with the King of Epirus 

A Conqu'ror t.ere in Argos, o'er your Father, 
Rather than that his Son, the lav'd Helenus, 

Shou'd fall on Argive Swords, 

Antig. Leſt you interpret 

My Thoughts with ſo much boldneſs any longer, 
And to confound you more than doubt can do, 
Learn the molt ſecret Wiſhes of my Soul ; 

I pray'd my Father might return in ſafety 

From all the Dangers of the bloody Field : 
Heav'n heard me; and it ſent th*Prince you nam'd, 
When he ſtood maſt in need of ſach an Aid, | 
To ſave him from the then deſcending Sword. 

My Pray*rs were next for ſafety of th'Prince, 
Who ſav'd my Father : You might had the ſame - 
For the ſame Action; but your Arms were buſy'd 
At too great diſtance to have brought relief. 

Ariſt. Curſe on my Stars, rhat give my Rival all, -, 
All the Occaſions to be braye and noble, 

And will allow me none. 

Antig. Acknowledge rather 

The Stars are equally the Friends of both: 
'Tis only he takes care to ſeize on all, 
While you with heedleſs Eyes let all paſs by. | 

Ar:ft Yet this ſame Prince, whoſe Cauſe you plead ſo well, 
Your Father does eſteem his mortal Foe, 

And will purſue his hated Life as ſuch. 

Antig. Now you've charg'd bim with that foul Ingratitude, '-. 
As you did me before, with want of Piety: | 
Be judge your ſelf, whether the Prince of Epirus, 

Or you ar£moſt our Eremy. 
Ariſt, This Night will ſhow't, 
My Orders are to guard the Palace-Gates, 
Where you are lodg'd; and be aſſur'd Pll die 
In your Defence rather than yield you up 
And will your Prince's Prooks of Love be ſuch? 
When you ſhall ſee him breathing bold defiance, 'L 
March his Epiran Army to your Doors, . 
Slaught'ring your Subjects in your very fight, 


And 


.# 


— — x 


22 


Pyrrhus Kimg of Epirus: 

And ſcatter Fires about che flaming City, 

Nor ſpare the gilded Roofs that cover you. 
Ant, If 1 muſt lole my liberty at night 

To be your Priſoner, -leave it me till then 

Yet thus much [ may tell before 1 go, 

Vil make my Duty, and my Lore agree, 

As much at variance as they icem to be; 

All | ſhall pray for in the fatal Strife, 

Shall be my Father's 'and my Prince's Life: 

To you, immortal Gods, the reſt | truſt, 

You beſt know how to a&t,. and will be juſt. [Exits 


Enter Helenus. 


Hel, Thus far I have paſs'd unknown by all their Guards 5 , 
But Love, that adds more ſharpneſs to the fight 
Has made the Prince of Argos find me out. 
I ſee he knows me, and it is as vain 
As baſe to {l7. 
Ariſt. Ha! wou'd you ſhun me, Prince? 
Think not, that this Diſguiſe can keep you hid 
From piercing Eyes like mine. 
Hel. | wou'd not have it. 
Next to th'meeting thoſe | came to ſeek, 
I'm glad to meet with thee : Make no Enquiries 
For whatſoever was my Errand hither, 
This is my Buſineſs now. [ Draws, 
Arif. So. forward, Sir? 
. You know not that.you are within tt'Walls, 
Where at my Call, my Slaves cowd come, and cruſh you, 
Without my trouble to unſheath my Sword. 
Hel. T know it, and that-drives me forward yet 
To end with thee, &er thy baſe odds arrive, 
And puſh this Ghoſt before me down the Shades. [Fight, 
Ariſt. (Wounded) The firſt, the ſecond time difarm'd - 
Gods: ye are kind, do-but take Life and all, 
And then FI thank you. 
Hel. They have ſpar'd you that, 
And I reſtore you this. 
 Arift., | ſcorn to takeit; 
I ſcorn to owe my Life, or Arms to thee. 
Hel, You ſhall not need, for | firſt. ow'd you mine; 


PR 


Pyrrhus King of Epirns, 23 
I do but pay the Debt. 
AArift. lnſtruQt me, Sir, h 
Hel. When you reſolv'd to fight me hand to hand, 
And drew not in your Multitudes upon me, 
Then I was made your Debtor. : 
Arift. What! then you thought your ſelf ſecure from harm 
In ſingle Combat with me, proud Triumpher? 
Hel. No, but | knew you cou'd ſecurely vanquiſh, 
By calling'in your Guards. 
.  Arift, Andcou'dſt thou think 
So meanly of me, that I wou'd uſe their aid? 
Hel. 1 ſtill expeCted what thou did'ſt; and what, 
Had I met thee within my Father's Camp, 
I too had done. 7 -- mn 
Ariſt. Now I'm loſt indeed : | 
Whilſt 1 found Rage and Fury like my own, 
I cou'd ſtorm on ; but Kindneſs melts me down, 
Give me thine hand, ard tell me, gen'rous Prince; 
Your noble Carriage forces me to ask you ; 
Say, is it poſſible we can be Friends ? 
Hel. Not whilſt we love, and hardly whilſt we live. 
Glory and Love m3kes us eternal Foes; 
Which ſhould we ſt:ive to meer, like raging Seas, 
Wou'd ruih between our Fold, and throw us far aſunder. 
Ariſd. What ſhall we do ?. 
Hel. Why? One of us muſt die- 
-To make the other happy. 
* _ Ariſt. Onthoſe Terms then, 
I take my forfeit Sword : We'll meet to Night, . 
Reſolve to end our difference in our Death ; 
And leſt the DarkneC. ſhou'd not make diſtintions, 
Antigone be th' Word, and this th'Place; 4 
Hel. That — Name ſhall draw me to th'Combat, 
Ev'n from the Rere of all my hindmoſt Troops ; 
The very mention of it wings me to thee, 
Swift as it flies to me. 
Arift. You will not fail. : 
Hel. 1 will nor, tho' my Father ſhou'd deferr 
His purpos'd Storm ; tho' | were ſure | mov'd 
To certain Ruine, and a thouſand Prodigies 
Foretold my Fall, tho'all th'Skies forewarn'd me, 
Heav'n flanrd above, and the Earth yawn'd beneath, 


24  Pyrrhus King of Epirus; 
ÞJI on + win my Love, or meet my Death. 
Ariſt. Stay, generous Prince, I owe a mighty Su 
And als 47 that fcorns to be mgnacks; Ia H 
Oh! what, what Reparation can | make ? 
Hel. That of your Sword to Night. 
Arift. That heaps on more, | 
And plunges deeper in th'deſperate Debt. 
] owe een that ro you, nor can | turn 
The fatal Point againſt the Prince that gave it ; 
' Yet there is a way, but a dear coſtiy way, 
At a large over-rate, to pay back all. 
May 1 not gueſs your Buſineſs was to .1rgos 
To ſee the Princeſs ? | 
Hel. | muſt confeſs it was, 
Ariſt. Down, ſwelling heart 3 Oh! Heav'n, I wou'd do ſomething, 
But that my ſtruggling Soul rebells within me: 
It ſhall, ir (ball have vent ; Go ſee the Princeſs, 
She only waits till ſhe ſees me withdrawn, 
To fly inco your Arms ; but then remember 
Your gallant Uſage is repay'd with Int*relt. 
And we may fight again with boundleſs hatred. 
I grudge the Ranſome, thar l give for Life ; 
But go, e'er | repent, and beg to die. 
Go now, the great, unwilling Grant is palt ; | 
And, oh ! believe l let you look your laft. LExennt. 
4 Re-enter Helenus with Antigone. | 
Hel. Oh! my Antigone, after fix Year's Abſence ; 
A tedious Age in the Records of Time, 
Bat vaſtly longer in Accounts of Love. 
What ſhall I ſay, to tell thee that my Soul 
Is full with Joy, how ſhall I pour it forth 
In Th-nks to Heav'n, that in one happy Moment 
Has recompenc'd an Age of Torments paſt ? 
'To'ſee thee (till the ſame, no Beauty faded : 
To ſee this matchleſs Truth, ta-fee thee mine, 
Is all the Gods cou'd grant, or | ccu'd ask. | 
Arrig. Nor are my Joys and Tranſports leſs than yours. 
I give an <qual ſhare of” Thanks to Heav'n, 
And _ Love to thee; but oh ! my Lord, 
I can't lee you in an Enemy's Town, 
(51c': muſt think them, who are ſo to you) 
Wi-acu: @ great allay of Grief and Fear. ; 
| He 


Pyrchus King of .Epicus. 256 
Hel, The Gods have yet preſery?d us from our. Youth; 
Should we miſtruſt them now, ;hy.that.we break _._ | 
The League onr ſelves, and fall out firſt -with Heaven: - 
No, Love; the Powers above are Juſt and Kind, 
And when they mould, fuch heavenly forms as yours, 
They grow our Rivals in their. Beauteous work, 
And place the Carefullſt Genius for. your guard. 
Ant. 1 fear not for my ſelf, for you l fear, 
Expoſed to all the horrid rage of War, 
In Bloody Fields, the Shaft that reaches you, 
Brings Death to both, for -it would wound me too. 
H&l. Vaniſh ſuch Thoughts, and let the little time 
That Heay*n allows, be wholly. ſpent in Love ; 
Speak then, but ſpeak the tend?reſt things you can, 
Such as did firſt expreſs our Infant Paſſions, 
When I Return'd from our laſt Wars in Macedon, 
Laden with Spoils, and you my Richeſt Prize, 
Were made my Priſoner, inmy, Father's Court. 
Ant. Oh! would this War, - had ſuch an End as that, 
And T again your Captive. | 
Hel. You had the Name, 
And oh ! the Name of Captive was too much, 
Too much for you to bear, but ſtill, my Love, 
Twas I that dragd the Chains, and drag them ſtil. 
Ant, That happy time firſt Joyn'd our youthful hearts, 
_ And oh! may none divide them.. 
Hel: No time, Antigone, 
No date of Years ſhall make our Flames expire, 
But Every one that lengthens out. our lives, | 
Shall add unto our loves. PO 
Ant. Hear heav*n, and Judge us then, the happy'{ Pair 
Your hands have made; and oh ! ifI prove falſe, 
Falſe to the Prince to whom 1 give my Soul, 
And Life, and Love; may that deteſted Name 
I ſcorn to mention, brand me whil'ſt I live. 
Hel. Oh ! hear me too, and let our Vows aſcend 
Together to your Skies, and ſome good God 
Enroll them there, if ever I forget thee, 
If I neglett to pay that awful.Love, 
I only Swear to thee, 'or ever look - 
With the leaſt wiſhing: glance, on other Beauties, 


May Fortune, in my Battles, Change like me ; 
| E May 


26 Pyrrhas King of Epirus. 
May Fame fly from me, and I fly from.Fame; 
May all my Laurels wither on my brows, - 
' And Cowards ſnatch them thence. FY 

Ant, Methinks, at two ſuch Paſſions Heay*n ſhould ſmile, 
The Jocund Orbs roul on in better Order, 
The Earth be wrapt in quiet, War ſhould Ceaſe, 
And Golden Peace be Proſp'rous. 

Hel. Oh! go on, | 
Speak yet a little more, alittle longer, 
For by the Gods, that liſten to our talk, 
*Tis Heav*n to me to hear you, not the Tongues 
Of Deities plead ſo well, my Heart leaps up, 
And pants at all you utter, each pointed Syllable, 
From thoſe dear lovely Lips, runs to my Soul, 
And Circles in my Blood. | 

Ant. Remember, Love, | 
What golden days we at Epirw paſt, 
When every Rouling day brought new'Delights, 
Sometimes we trod the Mazes of the- Woods, & 
And ſometimes ſtretch*d beneath a fpreading Shade, 
We lay, and liſten'd to each others talk. 
Sometimes we heard the Huntſman's diſtant Voice, 
And in one Chariot both purſu?d the Chace 

* And ſometimes ſailing in a gilded Barge, 

We ſaw the pleaſing Wonders of the deep. 
Ambitious Waves, that ſtrove to climb: the Rocks 
That bound them in, and roar'd to be repuls'd, 
And Monſters mounted on the back of Waves, 
When with full Sails, returning to the Court, 
You'd point me out, the then deſcending Sun, 
Scattring his beams about him, as he ſinks, 
And gilding Heav*n above, and Seas beneath 
With paint, no mortal Pencil can expreſs, 
And ſtiil our Talk was Love. | 

Hd. Remember too, how I alarm*d your Soul, 
When I began the harſh diſcourſe of War ; 
The hazards that my Youth has yet eſcap'd,” 
With all my earlieſt Combats in the Field, 
Here was my. firſt appearance in my Arms, 
Here my firſt ations, ſuch my firſt Command, 
Here wounded, and diſmcunted from my Horſe, 
My Father timely reſcy/d me fromDeath, 


Pyrehns King of Epirus. | 27 


Then would you Claſp me ir your'fearful Arms, 
And ſtart at every mentionof my Dariger, 
And beg, with trembling Lips, to end my Story. 
Ant. Stop, ſtop it now, for all my fears return, 
At the ſad thought of what is yet to come, _ 
The gath*ring Clouds urge on approachirg Night, 
Which falls with baleful mmnflnence o'er the Earth, 
It labours with the Birth 'its Womb contains, 
Which ſoon muſt be diſclos?d : methinks I ſee it, 
Soldiers, and Chiefs, all mingled in the War, 
A Thouſand Deaths among them, and you, my Prince, 
In the thick preſs, amidft a Thouſand Dangers. 
Gods ! Gods! preſerve my too, tvo venturous Love. 
Hel. ?Tis done, they cannot hear you beg in vain, 
Thou ſhalt behold me come with Conqueſt back, 
Crowns in my gift, to place upon thy Head, 
And Kingdoms to diſpoſe of at your Feet. 
Ant. 1 take the happy Omen from your ſelf, 
Your ſprightly looks, your dauntleſs mein, and geſture, 
Your Every Attion ſpeaks a ſure Succels, 
Yet, Oh ! let me remember Duty ſtill 
In all the hotteſt fury-of the Fight, . _ 
Even then, when mercileſs Death makes no diſtinions, 
My Father, and my Brother, be your Care, 
 Asyou are Heay*ns, and mine; ' . 
 #&l. They die thatdare 
Once offer at their lives ; ſhould Pyrrhu ſelf 
Engage them in the Fight, 1'd ſtop his Sword, 
And ſeize his thund'ribg Arm. - 
Ant. Good Heav*n defend them, ' ' I 
And Chiefly you, for oh ! thy Death, my Love. 
Hel. Again that fear ? | 
Ant, Forgive me for 'tis paſt, - ' -- 
And yet it makes me/weep, - to think we're mortal 
That the Cold hand of Death, at laſt muſt'come, 
That two, who love as we-do, ſhould be ford. 
Ever to part, the Rent will be like that 
Of Soul and Body. 
##l, Fate is yet far off - - | 
It ſeems aloof, as on ſome diſtant Coaſt, 
And all the Darts it hurls, are ſwallow'd up 


In the wide Seas that roul betwixt us, " s 
£ E 2 We 


- 


Pas v 


23 Pyrrhus King of Epirus: 
We may enjoy whole Ages in onr Loves -: ©; 
Ere it can reach us here, but when atlaft,,;; -,.  ,.. | : 
Our death, that neceſlary Jl}, willbappen,... -- . , i-* ; E 
We'll take our flight together. | 
When thou by pleaſant Journeys ſhalt arrive 
To thoſe bleſt Seats, where. all the happy live, f 
Whilſt all the ſhining Hoſt of. Heaven. make room,. 
Wait at their Azure gates, till thou {halt Come. . 
Then ſhall ſome God, the Chiefeſt, moſt Divine, *© 
And moſt Imperial of the Heavenly Line,” : 
Receive thecip his Arms, and lead thee.in,. 
Whilſt all the Joyful Powers, ,no-longer poor, 
Smile at their, Wealth, proud of their new got Store, 
And never-were. ſo vaſtly rich before... 


[Exeumts 


_—_— T A m—_ T —— yo I — —_— 4 _ 4 _ 


. Enter Pyrrbus and Disn: 


[Thunder and Lightning; 
Pyrrh. Ter E Day is fled, and diſmal Night Cs. 
Caſting her Sable Arms around the World, , | 

And folding all withirzher deadly Graſp, i. 2. 9M 
Ghoſts are abroad, the Monyments are e : 10 pn 
And Heroes, that have llept till now, have oO 
Their quiet Tombs, and once more walk the Earth. - 

Disn, All this is Stra e,- yet all.is as it ought vo be. . 
Methinks, when two ſuch Rival Armies mest,.. 
As Mazedons, and ours, the high Concern: ; | 
Of Heav'n ſhould beno1c6;; wethiaks the, Clouds | 21 
Should melt and rain down Blood; and Gods ſhould moura. ft 1: 
In all the Pomp of Grief, their rer'd $008. 1! 7 

Pyrrh.. And yet, my Generah all this rack of. Heaven,- $441 
Thoſe burning Orbs, and the loud Peals of T hunder,, dC 


Thoſe ſtarting Syars, "and yonder falling ons: i Ak 

Are Common things to us,. the: afugl Gl to 2 | Os [:: 2:1951 30 
Of, Jarring Elements: Wy" 70 4? £3 14k 7 if if; bref 
How do the Souldiers dear them I Herd o0 bo 2052 ohiw v3 cd 


_ Dios; 


. Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 29 
Dijon. They rear themſelves from Earth | 
Streight as the Spears, and brave as you can with ; 
All put their Gauntlets on, and graſp their Armour, 
All Eager for the Onſet. 
Pyrrb. There's Life in this. 
Go, and prepare them for the Noble —_ b; 
And I will March them on. -», [ Exit Dion. 
Ye Gods? I pay Juſt Reverence to your Altars 3 
I bow with awfull Worſhip to Yout ſhrines, 
And more ſubmiſfion than my ſlaves ſhow me, 
But when ſome Infant Power, ſome puny Deity, 
Some Ape of 5ove, that's fond of making miſchief, 
Aſſerts your Empire, and your Rule of heav*n, 
And with weak hands toſſes your fires about, 
Forgive me, if I cannot ſtoop. to Fear, 
But, ſpite of Prodigies, purſue the War. 


The Ghoſt of Alexander the Great Riſes before him all in Armour. 


L Thandes and Lightning. 

Ghoft., Well does this Noble Confidence become you, 
And Ob ! it glads the Soul of the dead Alexander, 
To ſee you thus, behold you thus.unmov's, . 
Even when the Powers above are at a loſs 
Which way to turn thcmſelves. 

Pyrrh, Ha ! Al:xanaer, 
Thou ſhould*it be He, and yet how Chang'd, how alterd 
From what thou wert alive? Oh! for what Cauſe 
Haſt thou forſook the Manhons where tby Spirit 
Had room to extend it ſelf, and rove at large, 
While we walk here, Encomber'd with a Body, 
That holds our Souls from mounti "g to the Skyes, 
And barrs all « onyerſe with qur Kindred Gods ? 

Ghoſt. My Love and Care for thee, the braveſt NG : 
I Left to ſhare my « onqueſts on this Earth, . 
Has drawa me hither, to impart the News 
Of warm Ocbates betwixt the Courts above, ]. 
And thoſe beneath, the Realms of Jove and. Fate, 
To tel} thee, tho thou et draw?ſt. vital Air, ... 
Canſt from thy Tent bebold the Marſhal'd Squadrons Tet 
And lead the Warlike. Phalanx to the Field,,, 
Mut ſhortly leave all this, and be at laſt, 
Juſt ſuch as I am. - | Pyrrh. 


d 
—) at, 4 err ommy Oe 7 LAG A.» + 


go - Pyrrhus King of ' Epirus. 
þ. 1 ſee you full of fate, toxins esconfeſs it; 
\ bo pong you to deliver al a / 'F » » 
For I Dare here the Utmoſt : Speak, Oh! Speak, 
Tell me what means this anger of the heav®ns, 
Why did the Eve deſcend ſo diſmal dark ? 
Why not one Star, to glimmer through the Skyes ? 
Why falts thoſe Clouds ſo thick ? Why fits the Night © 
So heavy on the brows of bended Mountains ? 
Ghoſt. | lookt within the Records of the Fates, 
Where the appointed Lives, and Deaths of Heroes, 
Are written down by an Unerring hand. o 
I turn*d to yours, and found it fall of Glory : 
Still as I ſearch'd the farther, every Page © 
Still pointed to New Conqueſts ; here was Mark*d 
Your Viftory over Rome, and here again 
Another follow*d, ſtil] the Voluminous Leaves 
Contain'd no mention, but of your Succeſs : 
Here Sicily is ſubdu'd, here Greece is Conquer'd,- 
Here Argos Storm'd and Won, but after that. 
The fatal Hiſtory ended moſt abruptly. 
Here Pyrrhus Dies. | 
Pyrrh, What time or date prefix*d ? 
Ghoſt. No Certain one was Fixd, asI could learn, 
But at a Council lately held beneath, 
Although the grand Reſult was hid from me, 
One of the Siſters, that had more of honour, 
More reſolute Fate, and a more ſettled fury, 
In the ſtern looks, than any of the Reſt, 
Was heard to Cry, where Daring Pyrrbw?*ſpies 
A Bull and Wolf, in Combat there he dies. 
Pyrrb. How ſhall I ſhun the Omen ! rather ſay, 
How Can I meet it ? Beaſts diſtinCt in Nature. \ 
A Bull, and Wolfe, how they ſhould come to fight, 
That never herd together ? perfet Riddles, 
Which Fate that makes them only can unfold. 
11 wait till that explains them. 
Ghoſt. Let them unravel their own webb themſelves, 
Which they Spin out into as many tangles 
As Gordiws ty*d his Knot. Cut, cut them throngh, 
The Sword alonecan do it. Dare al that's poſſible, 
And may be Heaven may yield, and Fate be aw*d. © 
Pyrrb. Vain is the talk of Deſtiny and Fate, 


& 


Pyrrhus King of Epirus. - 38 


Since evety Gallant man may make his own, 

P11 fall their Envy, if they Doom my fall, 

Heayv?n ſhall receive me, You ſhall point me out, 

Faint with my Wounds, and 7 nr as I paſs 

The Milkey way all Red with ſtreaks of Blood, 

To Demi-gods that ſtand around, and tell them, 

This was a worthy Succeſſor of Alexander, 

Worthy the Son of Ammon. 

Ghoſt. Oh! Only like my ſelf, I ſwear I will, 

PIl meet you on the Utmoſt verge of heay?n, 

Reaching a hand to life you to the Skies, 

And plant you next my Father and my Self. 

Pyrrh, Sound all the Trumpets there, to Arms, to Arms, 
Mix your loud Clangors, with thoſe peals from heay'n, 
Beat the big Drum, ſpeak Every Voice of War, 

Hong methinks to minglewith the Gods. | 
Ghoſt. It is now paſt midnight, and I dare not ſtay, 

The meagre Troops of Ghoſts are 2ll Returning, 

And wait me to conduCt their wandring ſteps ;. 

Go to the Battel, Doubt not your Succeſs, 

You cannot be o*ercome, who cannot fear : 

If you ſurvive, you Reign a Monarch ſtill, 

And if you fall, it's but to mount a God. [ Ghoſt ſake. 
Pyrzh. Am 1 a Coward ? ſure] do not fear, 

And yet l feel what I ner felt before, 

If this be fear, Death, and the worſt of Ills,. 

Are Eaſier to be born. Hence from my heart. 
Intruder, hence ; go chooſe ſome other Soul, 
Where you may Tyrannize without controul : 

Of mine you cannot, ſhall not ſtand polleſt, 

Yet you may boaſt, that once you touch*d my breaſt. 


Emer Amylius. Dion. 


e/Emyl, | Come to ask that Convoy from Your Majeſty, 
Which vſually is given to attend on ſuch 
As are Employ*d on Embaſſies. | 

Pyrrh, Welcome moſt Noble Roman to my Arms, 
More welcom if you'd ſtay. 


e/&myl, | dare not, Sir. 


Pyrrh. 1 hope you havethonght on it better. 
7 efmyl. Sir, I have not. 


Inever 


. "ere a 0 > woo Re ts 7 hat wo bs 


& 


32 Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 
I never Entertain'd one thought of Falſhood. 
Pyrrh. Then you refuſe my Friendſhip. 

e/Emyl. No I beg it, ; 
As I would beg Bleſſing from the Gods, 
If I could make you firſt the friend of Rome, 
Then you might make me yours ill then in Vain 
Are all the Royal Offers that you 
To heap Preferments on me in your\Court, 
Togive me the Command of all your Armies, 
The Gallanteſt indeed, I &er beheld, 
Excepting Rome's. I heard you with the Attention 
Dyeto a King, but did no more than hear ; 
It went not to tny Soul ; in vain you ſent 
Thoſe Preſents of Ineſtimable Value, 
That yet remain untouch*d. I am but Poor, 
I haveno Wealth, and yet I would have none, 
I would not be a Traytor to be Rich, , 
Or infamouſly great. - : My only treaſure 
Lies in my truth ; and if that once were loſt, 
What has e/£myliws left,: to make him worthy 
To be a Son of Rome, or Friend of Pyrrhrs ? 
Pyrrh, This matchleſs faith makes me but prize you more, 
Since your fidelity to Rome is ſuch, 
Who aQts as if ſhe knew not how to value it /.. - 
What would it be to me, who know the worth 
Of Conſtancy like thine ?. | 
e/Emyl. Suſpet me rather 
If once I forfeited my faith to Rome, 
When any new Occafion ſhould preſent, 
I might be falſe to you. I love you, Sir, 
AsIlloveall brave men, and ycu of all 
The very braveſt; 1 have ſeen you fight, . 
Where other Gallant Cheifs have ſtood at diſtance, 
As if there Buſineſs were to took on you ; 
And they had no employment in the Field. 
I have ſeen you break the battle of the Romans, 
And pierce reſiſtleſs through thoſe Marſhald ranks, 
Where never any Enter*d, till your ſelf; 
Succeſs ſtill hung upon your Conquring Sword, 
And Fate deſcended with it, where it fell. 
I have envy'd, and admir'd you, both at once, 


And as my Eyes ſtill followed you in Fight, 


Fix'd 


2% - ? _- 4 y PIR $ 8 Kg _ w77 . p pH Þ *. © - 


Pyrrhas C:2p of Epirus. 33: 
Fix'd on the Wondrous AQions you perform'd;, | 
I have often wiſh'd my ſelf Epirar born, 
But oftner you a Roman, gy 
Bluſh not to hear theſe Praiſes from a mouth, 
That wou'd not give them if they were not due, 
For Flattery is & thing as baſe as Treaſon. 
Dion. Go on, moſt noble Rom2n, all is truth, _ Fe 
And, by the Gods, I thank you that yon ſpeak it. 
He would not ſuffer me to praiſe him thus. | 
e/£m, *Twas there, my Lord, there in the Bloody Field, 
Your Godlike Proweſs won an Enemies'Soul, 
That Treaſures cannot tempt, nor Power betray, 
But open'd to receive the love of Vertue, 
And give it full Poſſeſſion, I tell you nothing, 
But what Phave dared to tell the Roman Senate, 
As they have fate aſlembled in the Capitol, 
I beg you, Royal Sir, to ſeek no more: 
- Be ſatisf1*d, I have a Juſt Eſteem, . 
For ſuch tranſcendent worth as dwells in you. 
Oh ! ſeek not to Corrupta poor old Man : 
My Honeſty is all the WealthI have, 
But that*'s my own, not ſubje& to the Chance 
That waits on other Fortunes ; that alone 
I can Call Mine ; thatlies within'my Power. 
Should all the Princes of the Earth conſpire, 
I may, and will, preſerve my Faith intire. 
Pyrrb, Say, have I many Enemies like you ? 
Em, If allthe World, Dread Sir, were ſuch as I am, 
You would not have an Enemy; if you mean, 
Whether the numerous Sons of Rome are ſuch, 
They are, my Lord, braver by far than me, M0 
And all I hope as faithful. : ; 
Pyrrh, Then their Conqueſt 
Will be an Enterprize beyond my Powers, 
Impoſſible for humane Arms to Atchieve. 
e/Em. Belie me, it will be no bloodleſs Victory, 
When ever it is obtained. » 
Pyrrh, Though it ſeems dangerous 
To Arm a foe, ſo terrible as you , 
Yet Þ havea Preſent to beſtow upon you, 
Which you may take without a Breach of Faith : 


Receive this Sword, it has been u*sd to Conquer, ' =D 
F n 


34  Pyrrins Mag of Epirus. 
And I dare Promiſe, it will hold its Yertae. 
In Roman hands, | 
e/£n. | take it on my Knees, 
As given by the dreadful God of War :- 
Fear not, its Vertnes ſhall be kept Entlre,. 
Unleſs it grows ungrateful to its Lord,. 
And turns againſt the Godlike Prince that gaveit;. 
Where every Sword muſt- fail.. * - ; 
Pyrrh, Prepare a Convoy, - _  ;; 
To wait the good e/-Emylis to the:Canfines. - 
See all the great Battalions rang*d ig Order, 
To Shout his farewel, as he paſles by. . þ 
Once more, my gallant-Warrious,/to-my-Soul,. 
Where thy ldea deeply is imprefs%d, 
Farewel with all the Friendſhip and Eſteem; 
That mutually ſhould dwell'in Noble Minds, . 
Thou wondrous Man, of- wondrous Faith, farewelt: 
e/Em, Yet ere | go, hear me, lllutrious Prince, 
1 give my thanks to you, my-Prayersto Heaven, 
That you may ſtill be proſperous your royal Carriage ; ; 
Has wrought this Juſt reſentment in my Soul : 
Still may you Triumph, your Succeſs be Ever 
Such as your. matchleſs Worth:may juſtly Claim,,, 
Diſtant your end of Life; no-end of Fame : 
May you Reign long, for numerous Years to come, 
And your Arms flouriſh againſt all but Rowe, [ Exit. 


Enter-Lanaſſa. 


Lan. Oh ! 'my lov d Lord, Lenaſſ# was afraid 
You!d have been hurri'd to the dreadful Batile, . 
Without the giving her one laſt Farewell. 

She heard the Trumpets call you, thought yow liſtn'd / 
To them alone, and no ſoft gentle Whiſper 

Of Love could reach your Soul. She ſaw. your-Ranks - 
Of Souldiers, glittering in their gilded Arms, 

Spite of the horrid Darkneſs, ſo ſhe haſtned- 

Ere yet you march'd them to the Walls of Argos, 
Once more to gaze upon you, once more ſee you, 
Print on your Lips. one laſt dear Kiſs at parting, . 
Agd if I then can ſpeak it, bid Farewell. . 


Pyrchus King of Epirus, 
Pyrrh; Leave but your Fears bchind, and then, my Love, 
We may deſpiſe whatever Fate can do; 
And bear our parting brave, as Princes ſhould, 
With all the Greatneſs of Heroick Minds; 
Yet tenderly withall. 
Lay, Alas, my Pyrrbu, 
Deny me not the Privilege of my Sex ; 
Women, that always ſtart and ſhrink at Dangers ; 
Women, whoſe Courage is not leſs than Mens, 
Only their Love is more: My Lord, I come not 
To beg you to defer the dreadful Battle; | 
For, though a Thouſand ominous Signs forewarn me, 
The ſudden Doom of Pyrrbw now is fix'd ; 
' Yet his Reſolves are firmer fix*d than Fates : 
I only come to offer up my Prayers 
In thy loy?d Preſence, though I fear the Gods 
Will be as deaf to them as-you have been. 


Pyrrb, Such were your FearSthis Morning, Love; and now, 


How vain and needleſs dothey ſeem to have been ? 
Unhurt, unwounded from the Field I came, 
And bought a Conqueſt at an caſie-Rate z 
Now [| ſhall only march againſt a Foe 
Already half o'ercome. 
Lan. Suppoling then | 
Argos were yours, the Crown upon yohr Head, 
And you upon the Throne : Suppoſe the War 
Were finiſh'd as I wiſh, which 1 dare ſcarce 
Suppoſe it will be; will your toils end there? 
Or, what will next be done ?
