Canonical Title: THE QUEEN'S MASK
Requested Title: THE QUEEN'S MASK
Authors: Thomas Heywood
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_eighteenth-century_loves-mistress-or-the_heywood-thomas_1792
Item Title: Love's mistress; or, the Queen's mask. By Thomas Heywood. An ancient comedy, and very scarce. 1792
Item Creator: Heywood, Thomas
Item Year: 1792
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE QUEEN'S MASK
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_eighteenth-century_loves-mistress-or-the_heywood-thomas_1792/bim_eighteenth-century_loves-mistress-or-the_heywood-thomas_1792_djvu.txt
— " ” = CRE — — — ——— — 


LOVE S MISTRESS: 


QUEEN'S MASK. 


ACT I. SCENE I. 


Enter APULE1US with a pair of aſs's ears in his hand. 


pow art thou, Apuleius, retransform'd ? 

Or elſe how cam'ſt thou metamorphos'd firſt 
Into an aſs? Why ſo dull a beaſt, & 
Of ſlow, and ſo obtuſe a memory? 

I had a brain aim'd at inſcrutable things, 
Beyond the moon; what was ſublunary, 
Methought was for my ſtudy all too mean: 
Therefore, | therefore was thus tranſhap'd: 
That knowing man who keeps not in his buunds, 
But pries into heaven's hidden myſteries _ 
Further than leave, his dulneſs is increas'd 
Ceaſeth to be a man, and ſo turns beaſt : 

And thus I fell; yet by the ſelf- ſame power, 
That calls all "BD wiſdom fooliſhneſs, 


Am once more to my priſtine ſhape reitor'd; 


Only to ſhow how vain my ainbitions were, 
This folly's creſt 1 ſtill about me bear: 
I fain would no my way to Helicon, 
Can none here tell me? Will none filence break? 
It ſecms theſe fit to hear then, not to {peak.” 

Enter MIDAS, 


Here's one | hope can tell me: Reverend father, 


How lies my journey to the uſes hill? | 
i Mid. 


— e — ww 
— 
oy 8 bi L I 


2 I0E's MISTRESS; OR, THE 


Aid Follow thy noſe, 
Ap Thon moſt unreveren'd groom, 

(1 hope my als's ſhape is quite ſhook off) 

Why in this churliſh manner ſpenk'ſt thou then ? 
Mid. The Auses ! hang the Muses. 
Ap. Can'ſt thou conduct 

My wandering ſteps 10 Agenippes* ſpring ?. 

To the Muses temple | am travelling, 

And mult to them perform a facrifice. 
Mid. An als head of thy own, thou muſt perform. 
Ab. If men be grown thus 1 : ; oh, you powers, 


 Remetamorphoſe me into an ats ! 


"Tis leſs inglorious, and leſs grief to live 
A beaſt, amongſt wild beaſt, than to fee man 
Brute like to blemiſh his creation. 

4d. I tell thee, once again, I know no Afuses ; 
No Muses hill, no Aganippes ſpring; 
And which is more, I care for no fuch toys. 

Ap. And which is worſt, none wiſe will care for thee. 
Oh grief, that ſilver hairs ſhould crown his head, 
By w whom the Mutes are diſhonoured : 
Say, idol, what's thy narner 

Mid What's that to thee ? 
Yet was | ſometime King of Phrigia, 
To whom good Bacc hays was benolding once: 
And iKrefare he bid me aſk what 1 would have, 
1 ihould be granted: Inſtantly I begg'd 
That whatſoever I touch'd might turn to gold ; 

t firſt it pleas'd me: When 1 ſat to eat, 

rouch'd the table, and it ftratght was goid, 
The trenchers gold; I call'd for earthen veſſels, 
Which by my ate were alcumis'd to gold, 
All which 1 hugg'd; but when came to carve, 
Even as the 1 fo the meat was god; 
The liquid wine, but touch'd, was icaight congeal'd; 
Aud had not Bacchus freed me from my with, 
Amidit my gold | hai been ſtarv'd ere this. 

Ap. Dull covetous tool. | 

Ai. The ſhame of this made me reſign my ſtate; 
And where before 1 was a Kiag of men, 
Jo fly the harthnels ot fouls butter jeſts, 


QUEEN'S MASK. 3 


J made this wool crown, and am king of beaſts, 
And my name's Midas, 
Agb. Then oh king of beaſts, 
Be this thy curſe; when thy baſe life's out worn, 
No ſacred poet name thee but in ſcorn: 
But wilt thou fit with ſilence? 
Mid. Thou prat'ſt and bableſt, what would'ft thou have 
me do? | 
Ap. Seeſt thou this ſphere ſpangled with all theſe ſtars, 
All theſe love-arts; nor ſhall they part from hence 
With unfeaſted cares: my purpoſe was 
To expoſe them to the ſhapes of all thoſe aſſes, 
With whom my loſt foul wandered in a miſt; 
Knowing, of them thou art not counted leaſt ; 
But firſt Ill ſhew a ſtory of mine own, 
Of Cupid's love to Pſiche, fit and ſee't; 
I'll make thee then ingeniouſly confeſs 
Thy treaſon *gainſt the Muses majeſty; 
Withall, not only whatſoever's mine, 
But all true Poets raptures are divine. 
Mid. Thou haſt prevail'd with me, by Pan I'll. ſtay ; 
But take heed, Poet, that your rhymes be ſound, 
Elſe with thine own aſs ears thou ſhalt be crown'd. 
Ap. We two contend—Art here, there ignorance : 
Be you the judges, we invite you all | 
Unto this banquet academical, I[Eæeunt. 


Recorders, Enter ApmETus, MENETIUs, ZETOris, 
ASTIOCHE, PETREA, and PSICHE. 


Ad. You peers and daughters to the Arcadian king, 
We have palt the greateſt part of our pilgrimage : 
Liſten, oh liſten, for theſe ſounds that guild 
Theairs light wings, fanning through all our ears 
Immortal tvnes; tell us we are arriv'd 
At ſacrei! Delphes; fee the burnith'd ſpires 
Advance thenſelves to welcoine our approach; 

The temple gates ſtand open, and that great Deity 
Whoſe tongue ſpeaks nothing lels than Oracle, 
Attended by his Sibells, deigns to appear, 


Enter 


n. 
. . . ]˙- Gt OPPIG trop he nern, 


Jy — = 
AR e 8 * 
"pe * ** 


„ 


PPP 1 


* * o . 1 2 * 1 1 
* — +> Þ a 9 8 2 
CPP 


LOVE's MISTRESS; OR, THE 


Enter APOLLo, 


Mere. Oh teach our knees with a molt ee touch, 
To kiſs this hallowed earth. 
Zelo. Ladies, kneel down. 
Ajftio. And ſir, relate to fair Latona's Son, 
Why this religious voyage was attempted, 
Al. Daughters shall: 
Sacred Apollo, god of archery, 
Of arts, of phyſic, and of poetry : 
Jove's bright hair'd fon, whoſe yellow treſſes ſhine 
Like curled flames, hurling a molt divine 
And dazzluig ſplendor on ihe ſe leſſer tires, 
Which from 1 thy gilt beams, when thy car retires, 
Kindle thoſe tapers that lend eyes to night : 
Oh thou that art the landlord of all light; 
Bridegroom to urorning, day's eternal king, 
To whom nine Muſes in a ſacred ring, 
In dances ſpherical, trip hand in hand, 
Whilit thy well-ſtring'd harp their feet command: 
Great Delphian prieit, we to adore thy name 
Have burnt fat thighs of bulls in hallowed flame, 
W hoſe ſavor wrapt in clouds of ſmoak and fire, 
To thy ſtar ſpangled palace duilt aſpire ; 
Tell us who ſhall untie the virgin zone 
Of the white-handed Piichez the alone 
Of three molt fair, is moſt unfortunate; 
All love, but none her love will celebrate 
With nupial rights; what muſt of her betide, 
Dread Phoebus tell, to whom ſhall ſhe be bride? 
Apel. Cloath Pſiche in a mourning weed, 
Then lead and leave her on a hill, 
Where Venus” doves their young ones feed. 
Her 3 not of human race; | 
Put one, wv hoſe flaming fight doth kill, 
And yet wants eyes; his ſer; zent's face 
If he behold, ſhe muſt fee ball, 
And yet by ſome notorious deed, 


Obtain a patent from that place 
Never to die. Pſiche, farewell, 


er d, much griev'd; unclaſp that ſpell. 
| Exit APOLLO, 


Al. 


7 2 - If] 
pond \ 


D 
addy N 


QUEEN'S MASK 5 


Ad. Much griev'd, andyet much joy'd, poor girl. I fear 
The ſcale of grief will weigh down that of cheer. 

MAoene. er mult ſee hell, and vet ſhe nc'er ſhall die; ; 
True, for hell's torments 1 5 eternally, 

Adi. But fer, no tongue ſhall her joys expreſs. 

Petre. Phoebus, thy words leave vs all comfortleſs. 

Pf, ] muſt eſpouſe a ſerpent, that's my hell, 

Zelo. But ſince you never ſhall behold his face, 
Your torments cannot be too horrible, 

Atene. St polffble, by deeds impoſtt ble, 

To attain the crown of immortality : 
It cannot be: Thus mocking Phoebus leaves us, 
Always in clouds of darkneſs to deceive us. 

Ad. Stay thy prophane tongue, leſt deſerved wrath 
Strike thee with death from tis revengeful ſphere: 
Thou muſt be cloath'd jn mourning ; ſo thou art, 

A mourning habit, and a thougnt- al heart: 
Thou mult de left alone on Venus' hill; 
The deſtinies decree, we mult fulfill: 
Thy huſband muſt want fight, and yet have eyes 
That flame and kill; oh leave theſe myſteries 
Until the gods reveal them. Come let's hence; 
Change your Arcadian tunes to Lidian ſounds, 
Sad notes are ſweetelt, where deep woe confounds, 
[ Lxeunt onnes, 


Recorders, Euter VENUS. 


Jen. Cupid, my ſon, where's he ? [ within, 
Cub. Anon, forſooth. ke 
Ven. PII gather rods of roſes, if you mock me 
With your anon forſuoth, | | Wilhins 
Cup. Anon- forſooth. 
Ven. Shall 1 be thus vex'd ? ſtill when my blood 
Boils in the fire of anger, then this ape 
With purpole frets me. - Boy. 


Enter Cui. 


Cup. Anon: forſooth. 
Jen. Will Juno come, or Ceres ? 


Cup. Juno lay lolling in my uncle's lap, 
Ven, Which uncle? 


Cup 


6  LOVE's MISTRESS; OR, THE 


Cup. Uncle Jove : I laught out-right 
To ſee how (wanton-like) with both her arms, 
She clung about his neck; gave him ten kiſſes, 
Toy'd with his locks, look'd babies in his eyes, 
And {wore ſhe would not watch him when he went 
Amoneſt his wenches, if he'd turn away 
His ſawey page, the ſmooth-fac'd Ganimed, 
The boy by chance upon her fan had ſpilt 
A cup of nectar; oh how Juno ſwore! 
I told my aunt 1'd give her a new fan, 
To tet Jove's page be Cupid's ſerving man. 
Ven. What's this to Venus? meſſage, what ſaid Juno? 
Cup. I aſk'd her when ſhe'd come, and in good ſooth, 
She anſwered nothing, but anon-forſooth. 
Jen. And where was Ceres, what did ſhe reply? 
Cup, Ceres was binding garlands for good Pan, 
Of blue bottles, and yellow piſs-abeds _ 
That grew among the wheat, with which ſhe crown'd 
143 His forked brows, and woed him with his horn 
410: To rouſe the ſkipping Saytrs, to go hunt 
A herd of ſwine that rooted up her corn; 
I aſk'd her when ſhe'd come, and in. good ſooth, 
She ſent me packing with anon-forſooth. | 3 
Ven. I ſent for Pan, and for Apollo too, | | 


What news from them? 


Cup. They ſaid they would be here immediately. 


Enter PAN and APOLLO. 


Apo. Why in ſuch haſte bath Venus ſent for us? | 7 
Ven. I fent for Juno and for Ceres too; C 4 
But they'll not come. 2 
Pan, Well, what's the news with you? 
Jen. Have you not heard how Venus is contemn'd? 
Her temples gaz'd at, but not trod upon, 
Her ſtately hangings, and her pillows torn ; 
Thoſe roſy garlands, that her ſtatues crown'd, 
a Are wither'd, or elſe trampled on the ground; 
1 Tluhoſe troops that flock'd to Paphos to adore me, 
| Shun Paphos now, and ſcornfully abhor me. 
| Pan. That's ſtrange, for all are up to th'ears in love: = 
4 Zoys, without beards, get boys, and girls, bear girls; 
bf | Fine little rattle-babies, ſcarce thus high, 


Are 


i £ 
V. 

i875 
# 


QUEEN'S MASK. - 


Are now calld wives: If long this hot world ſtand, 
We {hall have all the earth turn Pigmy-land. 
Ven. All honour Love, but none adore Love's Queen, 
Apo. The injury is great, but from whence ſprings it? 
Yen. From PFſiche, daughter to the Arcadian king, | 
They call her Queen of Love, will know no other, 
And ſwear my ſon ſhall knecl and call her mother, 
Cup. But Cupid ſwears to make the Jacks forſworn. 
Apo. Will Citharea ſwallow this diſgrace? 
Pan. What ſhall Pan do in this? 
Yen. Lend me your aids. 
If you meet Pſiche, charge young Mercury 
To ſend me to her, or im n priſon her 
Till you have ſent me word. 
Apo, If this be all, Venus ſhall ew her with. 
Pan. Pan, by his upright horns and bcard, doth ſwear 
Jo hunt out Pſiche; but if I do this, 
What will ſweet Venus give me? 
Len. A ſweet kiſs ; 
And Pheobus ſhall have one, Cupid another, 
Upon condition they will right thoſe wrongs 
Which Pſiche in her great pride throws on me; 
Draw from thy quiver a dull leaden ſhaft, 
And ſtick it through her boſom to the heart; 
Make her in love, but let her proud eyes doat 
On ſome ill - ſnapen drudge, ſome ugly fool; 
Do this, I'll weave for thee a coronet 
Of roſes, mix'd with Berenice's hair; 
And give thee my beſt chariot, and my doves, 
To hunt with on the earth, or in the air; 
Wil thou do this, my boy ? 
Cup. I will forſooth. 
Pen. Nay, do not mock me, wilt thou? 
Cup Yes indeed, indeed I will forſooth. 
Jen. Sweet lad, adieu then: 
Apollo, Pan, revenge poor Venus' wrongs, 
Whilſt I unyoke my ſilver colour'd team, 
To wanton on the boſom of yon ſtream. [ Exit. 
Ape Now ſhe has call'd me down unto the earth, 
I'll try what paſt mes dwell among the ſwains. {| Exit. 
Pan, And with my Satires I wili have ſome ſport 


Here in the Arcadiau valleys. [ Exif. 
Cup. 


8 LOVE's MISTRESS; ox, THE 


Cup. Shall] ?fche's beauteous eyes gaze on baſe love? 
No, let my mother ſtorm, and ch; afe nd lower, 
She (hall be none but Cupid's paramour : 
Enter ZEPHIRUS. 
Ho Zephirus: how now, thou puffing ſlave, 
Art thou grown proud, thou ſwell'ſt ſo? Gentle wind, 


| Clap on thy ſmootheſt feathers, ſleekeſt wings, 


And mount thee to the top of yonder rock, 

There (alt thou find anon a forlorn maid, 

Convey her genily down unto the vale 

That borders on my bower; ſee this perform'd, 

And J will cloath thee in a grafs- 8 oy robe, 

Spotted with daſies, pinks, and marigolds; 

Ill play the thief in Flora's treaſury, 

Jo make all eyes in love with Zephirus: 

Fly hence, do this, and henceforth be thou king 

Of all the winds, and father of the ſpring. [Exeunt. 


Enter Apukrps, MENETIUs, ZE TLOoTIS, ASTIOCHE, 
PETREA, and Psic Hk. 
Ad. Behold the foot of that unhappy rock, 
Upon whole frozen top, by Phœbus' doom, 


Thou muſt abide thy molt ſiniſter hap. 


Aſtio. Dear ſiſter Pliche, 
Pj Peace, Aſtioche. 
Petrea, Father: you ſhould all have mourn'd 
When the mad ſpirits of the multitude | 
Eneel'd down and call'd me Venus; then have wept, 
When Citharea's altars were left bare, 
And I was call'd a goddeſs; when theſe tears, 
Whoſe reeking makes my funeral lights burn dim, 
Might have quench'd Venus' wrath, but leave me now 
To fight with death, or meet worſe miſery. 
Menue. But lurks that ferpent in this fatal rock? 
Pet. So ſaid Apollo, 
Zelo. Then Menetius, 
We will conduct fair Pſiche to the cave, 
And rip the monſter's intrails with our (words. 
Pſi. Forbear all force, 1 will aſcend alone; 
Phoebus will be diſpleas'd: Alone ſaid he, 
Diſtreſſed Pſiche ſhall climb up yon hill. 
Ad. The way is dangerous, thou wilt loſe thy ſelt 
Without a guide. 


Pſi, Death muſt my conduct be, 
See 


_ QUEEN'S MASK. - 9 


Ce where the pale hagg ſtands; vain world adieu, 
1 am his bride, he waits for none of you. 
4 | [ She climbs up the Rock. 
Ad. What pains the poor girl takes, ſee how ſhe ſtrives 
Againſt the ſwelling boſom of the hill, 
Mene. See the kind brambles, as enamor'd of her, 
Circle her beanty in her catching arms, | 
Wooing her to come back; as who ſhould ſay, 
Thou run'ſt too faſt to death, ſweet Pliche ſtay. 
Ad. But all in vain, ſhe now hath climb'd the rock. 
And wafts her hand, do you the like to her, 
W hoſe timeleſs death prepares my ſepulchre. 
Petre. Siſter with courage meet thy deſtiny, 
To-morrow, if thou liv'ſt, we'll viſit thee. [ Exeunt. 


Enter Cup D and ZEPHIRUS. 


Cup. Fly Zephirus, on top of yonder monnt 
My fair love fits; on thy ſoft ſwelling wings | 
Let Pſiche ride——you voices that attend me, [Ex. Zep. 
Dance in the air like wantons to intice 
My love to dwell in Cupid's paradife: _ 
Muſick with raviſhing tones inchant her ears; 
A banquet there: She that doth Cupid wed, | 
Thus ſhall ſhe live, and thus be honoured. Exit, 


Enter ZEPHIRUs, and takes PSICHE from the Rock, and 
exit with her in his arms, A Banquet brought in. 


Enter ZEPHIRUs with PSIcHE, and places her at the 
3.4 Banquet, and exit. 


Fi. Where am I now? For through the cheerful air 
Hither I have been brought, on unſeen wings; 
What wonderous place is this? No ſerpent ſure 
Lurkes in this pleaſant bower ! my ear drinks funds 
Of heaven tun'd inſtruments ; ] ſee no creature, 

And yet methought ſoft fingers ſet me down, 
And I am forc'd by ſweet compulſion, „ 
[ Benquet fir/t plain, and preſently ſet out with all delicates. 
To be the only gueſt of this fair board, 
Which empty, is as ſoon new furniſhed; 
I fain weuld touch theſe ſweets, but fear to taſte them: 
Eccho, Taſte them. 2, Taſte them, 3. Taſte them. 
| 25 B | P/iche 


10 LOVE's MISTRESS; OR, THE 


P/. What voice is that? I dare no longer ſit, 
Eccho Sit. 2. Sit, 3. Sit. 38 | 
P/i. Who mocks me? are you devils, or are you gods? 
Eccho, Gods. 2. Gods. 3. Gods. | 
Pji. The gods will do no harm. 
Eceho. No harm. 2. No harm. 3. No harm. 
P/i. Pſiche be bold, and taſte this heavenly food, 
Eccho. Ha ha ha. 2. Ha ha ha. 3. Haha ha. 
Ey. Theſe are no Ecchoes, for they ſhift their place. 
Nor catch they my laſt words as Ecchoes do: 
For when I would have fed, they raock'd my pride, 
They laught aloud at my preſumption : 
No, theſe are fury-elves, and will torment me, 


Enter LEPHIRUsS with drink. 


If thus I talk to them. Wh fills this wine, 


And tempts my eye with it? as who ſhould ſay, 


Drink Pſiche. 3 
Eccho. Drink Pſiche. 2. Drink Pſiche. 3. Drink Pſiche. 


Eſi. I'll taſte no drop of this inchanted wine. 
Fain from this magick circle would I riſe, 


Yet dare not; oh let Pſiche ſee your eyes, 


Or rid me hence, and ſet my fears in peace. 
Echo, Peace. 2. Peace. 3. Peace. 
| | Enter Cupid. | | 
Cup. How lovely is my Pſiche; earth's too baſe 
To be poſſeſt of her celeſtial form: | 
My mother hates her; for the gods I fear 
Would baniſh her from -earth, my love being there : 
And therefore ſhall ſhe live in Cupid's bower, 
For ſhe deſerves to be love's paramour : 
Oh! how her fair eyes wound me; by this kiſs 
And this white hand. 5 
P/. Oh me! what voice is this 
I ſee ? beſides, ſoft Angers, and a ring. 
Cup, Long white fingers, ſoft white hand, 
Ring and all at thy command. 
Pjz. Is this my huſband then? 
Cup. Ho, Zephirus, 0 
Remove hence thoſe ambroſian diſhes ſtraight. 


ZePHIRUS takes off the Banquet. 


Pj. My father much miſtook the oracle; 7 
; 0 


4s 
"AD, 


x W's, mY. * 
* Py 1 3 N Py rr F 
wh SW DRE BO * r CREED N a> 8 IG 
= = a 2 I * Lat r 2 8 Yom 420% 
7. n 2 W Vx „ n 
3 7 ed Se * 3 8 * Py N x 
N <0 . a 3 ard Te 
n 


. + — e OP — TPW. Fes. - > or Ne. 
— E 2k a 8 Fra oe 3 7 ; — ee <a Xp = LI AT nt 
E % = RES ER ee e / e ora oo ORR on 8 "TY" 7 SL ® * 9 
JJ TTT r 
E 2222 ³˙ AA en OS EIN NP FT. IR 8 * ; n as.» 


QUEEN's MASK» 11 


To this ſweet voice, could I enjoy the ſight, 
I ſhould myſelf then ſtile Queen of delight. _ 
Cup. Pleaſure ſhall be thy lacky ; wilt thou hunt, 


Then in an airy chariot, drawn by birds, x; 


On the winds downy back my love ſhall ride; 

Mild Zephirus ſhall be thy waggoner; 

W ho if the heat offend, his ſilver wings 

Shall fan cool air upon thee, yet my love, 

If thou commit*{t one fin, thou art not mine. 
Pſi. Name it, ans I'll avoid it for your ſake. 
Cup. Thy mourning ſiſters ſhortly will return, 


And ſeek thee on the rock from whence thou cam'ſt, 


But ſhun their ſight and ſpeech; Pſiche do this, 
Thou robb'ſt me elſe of love, thyſelf of bliſs. 

P/;, Not ſpeak nor ſee my ſiſters; oh what pleaſure 
Can Pſiche take, lock'd in a golden goal? 

Cup. Run not unto thy ruin, gentle love, 


| Yet if thou needs wilt fee and ſpeak with them, 


Command thy ſervant Zephirus to bring them 
From top of yonder rock into this vale, 
But if they make inquiery who I am, 
Fill both their laps with gold, and ſend them gone, 
Beſides I woo thee by this nuptial kiſs, 
Do not perſuade me to diſcloſe my ſhape, 
Attempting that, thou loſeſt this high ſtate; 
J then mult leave thee, thou live deſolate. 
Fſi. In all theſe things, I will obey my love. 
Cup. Then Pſiche, in thine unſeen huſband's hand, 


Claſp thy white fingers, I'll now crown thy bed 
With the ſweet ſpoils of thy loſt Maiden-head. [ Exeunt 


Enter APULEIUs and Mipas. 


Mi. Hand off, let go my ſheep-hook, I'll not ſtay, 
I'll hang myſelf, e'er I'll ſee out thy play: 


Call you this poetry? 


Ap. 1f this diſpleaſe thee Midas, then I'll ſhew thee 
Ere I proceed with Cupid and his love, : 


What kind of people I commerſt withal 


Jo. my tranſhape. £ 
Mi. That's when thou wert an aſs. 
Ap. The very ſame. 
Ai. Yes, that I fain would ſee. 
| B 2 


12 Love's MISTRESS; OR, THE 


»S, 


Ap. Sit then and view thine own infirmity. 
A A dance, Enter a proud "_ with Ears. 
Mi. What ſellow's that! 
Ap. A ſelf-will'd inſolent fool, 
Who ſpights at thoſe above him, and thoſe 8 
Deſpiſeth, and his equals jets upon ; 
Rich in his own conceit, in judgment poor, 
Still carping, tho' a coxcomb, and may paſs, 
' As theſe days go, for a proud arrogant aſs. 


Dance. Enter a prodigal A/s. 


17 d. I, this I like; what fellow's that? 
Ad. A fellow he, 
Who riots that, which moſt penuriouſly 
His father hoarded; in drabs, drink, and play, 
Wearing fantaſtick habits, and gay cloaths, 
Till he hath quite exhauſted all his gold, 


And for a prodigal aſs may be enroll'd. 


Dance. Enter a Drunken Aſs. 
Mi. This gives me good content What's he? 


Ap. A pot companion, brother to the glaſs, 
That roars in's cups, indeed a drunken als. 


Dance. Enter an Uſurer. 
Mi. He looks like a good fellow—Now that greybeard? 
Ap. One that doth pinch his belly in his life, 
And ftarve his own guts to make others feed; 
Patcheth his own cloaths to make others proud, 
And for a covetous aſs may be allow'd. 


Dance. A young Gentlewoman. 

Mi. But ſo did never Midas Now, that Minks? 

Ap. Her mother's darling, ſhe, born to good means; 
In love with all the fees, yet truly, none; 
Who when great heirs are proferred, trifles them; 
And in the end, when with none elſe (the can, 
She marries with her father's ſerving- man: 
And that is a right ſhe-afs.
