Canonical Title: ROMAN EMPRESS
Requested Title: ROMAN EMPRESS
Authors: William Joyner
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-roman-empress_joyner-william_1671
Item Title: The Roman empress. 1671
Item Creator: Joyner, William.
Item Year: 1671
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: ROMAN EMPRESS
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-roman-empress_joyner-william_1671/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-roman-empress_joyner-william_1671_djvu.txt
_ — 
tee In a rmo————_——_—_ 


The Roman Empreſs. 


Of virgin ſoftneſs, or remorſe z hereafter 
Theſe fountains of my eyes be ever dry 3 
My hands, and tongue audacious to commit 
Miſchiefs to terrifie mankind; my looks 
Diſſembling, treacherous, and fatal be 

To thole they pleaſe; rhe powers of my ſoul 
Let my rage rule, and nothing it controul. 

Hoſ. Aurelia, now thou thew'(t, thou doſt inherit; 
As well as Mothers beauty, Fathers ſpirit. 
Magnanimous revenge, not love's a gueſt 
Fit to be harbor'd in a royal breſt, Exennt: 


Sophonia. Macrinms. 


Soph. O dear Macrinws, haſten thy departure, 
Hoſtilizs muſt not know thy longer ſtay, 

He thinks he gives, what he can take away, 
Thy liberty, which I have ſo endanger'd. 

Mac. Iwould expoſe my life, much more what you 
Call liberty, ro ſerve your Majeſty. 

Soph. That word does but revive 
The memory of my unhappy fate, Macr. weep: 
Which I would fain forget. I prethee weep not. 

' Mac. Madam, I mult, though I rejoyce to ſee 
Your virtue triumph o're your miſery. 

Soph. Thou ſceſt Valentizs finds his ſatisfaftion 
In my ſuppoſed death. Aac. The Gods we ſee 
Intend your happineſs, ſince ſure by their 
Tnſtin&t he deſtines Flor#s tor the Throne. 

Sop. Macrinus, thou wouldſt fain revive my falſc 
And treacherous hopes; but oh, I fear the heavens, 
Which ſee mee in my mileries grow old, 

Will in them let me die : but pray lets fee 
The way th' haſt found (excuſe my vanity ) 
To ſave my reputation, whenI dye. 
Mac. Here's the Inſcription which I have made of you. 


The 


The . Roman Empreſs. 7 


The moſt unfortunate of women, the ſuppoſ'd Sophonia, wat the 
rue Palladia, Empreſs, hs Wife of Valaniius, condemn'd by bin 
upon 4 faje ſuſpicion, but ſav'd by Macrimus _— of her inn0- 
cence and virtue, in teſtimony whereof he hath left theſe charalers 


ingraved with his own hands. 


This I have cut in ſeveral plates of brafs, 
Which fixt in walls, and on!y incruſted over 
With a ſlight plaiſter, in ſhort-time decaying, 
Will clear your ſtory to the abuſed world. 

Soph. Honeſt AMacrirns, how much I fear 
I never ſhall this zeal of thine repay : 


Once more farewel, make ſpeedy haſt away. Exenmt. ©: 
Carb. —— Though Courts have ever been | 


The chiefeſt Theaters where love delights 

To repreſent his cruel, ſerious follies: _ | 

Yet Camps are not exempted. Serv. Yes, Sir, but 

The wonder is to ſee our noble Geriral 

Surpriz'd thus with the piftare of a Lady. | 
Car. Why were youſo ? Flo. Yes, when the Roman Eagles 

Victoriouſly uuder my condutt flew 

Through 7taly, reducing the Enemies power 

To the Precindts of Rowe; in the ſurpriſal 

Of Sarnium, I (aw the picture of aLady, 

Drawn by the pencil of the famous Saga, 

Whoſe ſhape the very Goddeſſes would'take, 

Were they to makelove here on earth again': 

Ah how this objetiin thervery moment * ) Koi 

Depriv'd me of my liberty, ſo that 

My entrance there was ſervile, not triumphal: 
Car. To ſee ariſe ina great General 

Confuſicn froma Picture, from a ſhadoyy,  - 

Is very ſtrange. Serv. -F thowghti + 

A painted fire might deceive the fight 

207361 But 


8 The Reman Empreſs. 
But never raiſe a heat, or kindle flames. 

Flor. J __, I grant this; did not fame 
Paint out th' original ſubſtance of this ſhadow 
Above what fancy comprehends ; Eumolpus 
Has on this ſubject made a Song, wherein 
He'has toucht the proper ſtring of ay affeftion,, 
With commendation of his friend the Painter. 

Boy, lets ſee it, go-now, and ſing it.. 


. SONG. 


That divine form which thus deludes thy ſenſe, 
And holds thee gazing in a ſtrange ſuſpence, 
The creature only is of Sanga's art 3, 
Tek from theſe eyes love does his fires dart. 
To them a lively ſpeech his fav'ring hand 
(Which to the tongue he never would impart ) 
. Has giv'n like Sirens to betray thy heart. 
Ab ſlye then ! "tis too late 5, thou haſt thy wound, 
And there doſt pauting lye upon the ground. 


My ſtrange misfortune is, that F, 
Or rather my ill fate, have fixt my love 
Epon an Enemy of Yalentins; 
So that if I purſue it, T ſhall loſe 
My Princes favous; and if not, 1 loſe 
My ſoul, my ſelf. 
Ear. Why he is ſick of my: diſeaſe, Love: 
An Enemy of Yalentins 3 to Thee Aſide. 
Aurelia T gave my faith before. 
Fhy Father was declar'd his enemy. 
Ser. L muſt condem this love. Car. .*Tis then with high. 
juſtice. 
Ser. He's guilty who hates not 
His Princes Enemies 3 can you think him 
Fhen innocent, who.thus adores them.. 
Flor.. ————— Have patienee only, and 
Conſider if th' admirer of-this object. 


The Roman Empreſs 9 
Rather deſerves reproach, pity, or en s 4 piGFwre to them, 
Car. 0 _ YA I fee k _ Hef ſtartling. 
I have defended here my Rival 3 this p 
Is my Aurelia's pifture, which I left her 
A pledge of my eternal love at parting. 
Ser. This image ſo confounds my reaſon, that 
Th' accuſed may juſtly abſolve himſelf aſide ſurpriz.'d. 
By virtue of his Judges crime 3 I muſt 
Think of my duty to my Wife and Prince. 
Flor. —-] perceive ſtrange emotion 
In them, but would not from their weakneſs ſeek 
Protettion for my failings. Why thus chang'd? 
Come in, and recollett your ſelves, Ile ſee 


If you are ſick of my infirmity. Exennt. 
Arſenius. Honorins. Arſ. diſeniſ'd in habit 
f acommon ſouldier. 
ys Behold us here arriv' 
At the Tents of Yalentizs 3 thatT, 


The General of Hoſtil;#s, diſguiſ 'd 

In this vile habit of a common Souldier, 

Expoſe my ſelf to him my Enemy, 

Are ſtrange effeQts of love-: that liberty 

Which I give thee, 

Thou in requital ſeems't to take from me. 
Hor. Sir, that you have reſtor'd me to my ſelf 

And liberty, I muſt confeſs, but not | 

That I thus ſeek to recompence your favours 

Expreſs your meaning : theſe words offend my honor, 
Arſ. You have oft told me that 

Your General Flor#s was your greateſt friend 5 

On which belief I let you know he was 

My only Son;z aad how capricious fortune 

Had ſeparated thoſe i and affetions 

Which nature joyn'd. Hor. *Tis true, and I acquainted 

You with his love of your Princeſs Aurelia; 

Well knowing the advantages you would 

Take to ſeduce him from his loyalty, 


With 


10 The Roman Empreſs. 


With fo fair a temptation 35 but know 

To this T then conſented, fearing, that 
To take from noble vertue the occaſion 
Of victory, was to envy her triumphing. 

Arſ. T hope his love of her will now extort 
That which the duty of a Father could not, 
That's his obedience 3 fince love ever finds 
His Empire greateſt in the greateſt minds : 
though hitherto 
The vain aud empty title of being loyal 
Prevail'd more with him then the entreaties of 
A moſt indulgentand atender father. 

Hon. Sir, you are tootndulgent, who would thus 
Permit, nay more perſwade him to become 

A Traitor to his Prince, the common Father 
Of us, and of his Conntry 3 and in whoſe 
Obedience, thongh with loſs of life, and fortune, 
He's happy in performing thns his duty. 

Arſ. Ofall wild beaſts, which entrance find in Courts, 

Malicious detraQors are the worſt : 

Of all domeſtical, theſe flatterers, 

Which into Princes ears gently diſtill 

The poiſon of theſe maxims, as if haman 
Nature could thus comply with ſervitude, 
Not foaming, at the Curb 3 Sir, like ſea waves, 
Impetuouſly forc'd by ſeveral winds, 

We are by the tempeſtuous torrents hurri'd 
Of rage, ambition, choller, and revenge : 

Of which the latter juſtly has provoke 

My indignation againſt Yalentias. 

Hon. Nothing can jnſtifie theſe practiſes 
Againſt your Prince. 

Arſ. But to the ſabje@, to return from which 
We deviate now ; I haveof late obtamm'd 
Aurelia by the conſent of her Father 
In marriage for my Son, to whomT lately 
Addreſt a letter ſignifying the fame, fhews hima letter. 


Intending you the happy bearer of 
ms Fhis 


The Roman Empreſs. | 'T 


This grateful news, of which another Copy | 

T to Axrelia (ent, to ſhew my pen * 
As forward as my ſword m the procuring 

Hers, and her Fathers intereſt ; but fince - 

Conſidering in deſperate diſeaſes, 

That extreme remedies are beſt, I've chang'd 

My thoughts , perſwaded that a Fathers preſence 

Will be more prevalent 

Then the mute eloquence of Paper fo 

Behold me here arrived, to procure 

An end to my calamities 3 my Sons 

Greateſt felicity 3 the ruine of | 
The perſecutor of my life, Yalentiwe. 

Hon. Give o're this raſh diſcourſe 3 here thou ſhouldſt die 
The ſacrifice of my juſt indignation, draws at hint. 
Wer't not to envy thy brave Sons ſecure r4;T A 
Triumphing over thy vain ſtratagems. 

Doſt hope through my proteCtion to put 

Thy treacherous practice into execution 

Apainſt my Prince ? the ſound of this diſcourſe 

More odious is to me then the noiſe 

Of chains or fetters, which Ile rather ſuffer. 

Theſe abje& thoughts proportionate, and proper 

Are to thy doating age 3 attribute to 

Thy fortune of having ſo brave a Son puts up his ſword. 
The life, thou receiv'(t from theſe generous hands. 

Ar. Is it a generous part thus to reward 
My benefit with this ingratitude ? 

Hon. A benefit conferred in the ſenſe 
Of intereſt, merits no recompence. _ 

Ar. My forward love miſtaken was to try 
To gain affeftion from an Enemy. 

Hon. Thy hopes are vain, it was thy error here 


With curteſie to *abuſe a Gentleman. 
Ar. A Gentleman, who ſuch reſentment ſhows 
The man, to whom his liberty he owes ? 
Hen. Can he be author of my liberty, | 
Who would engage me in this —— d i: 
| 2 Hs. 


12 T he. Roman Emprefs. 


Ar. Sir, is it treacherouſly, or nobly done ,. 
Toreconcile a Father to a Son ? 

Hon. A Father, he who ſeeks to rob.a Son. 
Of his true honor, and reputation ? 

Ar. Honor to ſpend his youth, and.time, and die- 
In ſervice of his-Fathers Enemy ?. 

Hor. His reſpet to his Father muft give way 
To that of his true Prince, who all mult ſway. 

Ar. Mans firſt, and greateſt duty from the tye 
Of nature comes, not human policy. : 

Hor. Nature muſt yield to reaſon, which thinks fit, 
Privat to publick int'reſt ſhould ſubmit. 

Ar. Go to thy Son Arſeniws, and try, 


If he be cruel like thy Enemy. 

Hor. Go tothy Son Arſenixs 3. there's his Tent : 
A Fathers ignominy there lament 3. points to the Tents 
And a Sons glory, as thy puniſhment. of the Camp. 


A— 


«« 


Fulvia, Antonia. Attendants. 


#ul. Ll but Antonia leave the place. 
Exceſlive griefs, Antonia, receive 
No mitigation from-advice of friends : 
Andſuch are mine 3 ſo that if I.implore 
Aſſiſtance, I exaſperate them more. 
Ant. Madam, what cauſes this ſtrangealteration ? 
So many nights your eyes have ſeen no ſleep, 
Which chang'd of late, have loſt their uſual luſtre. 
Your looks and ſpeech are not accompany'd 
With their accuſtom'd graces 3 as-ſome ſick 
Perſons, in cold languiſhing all the night, 
With feavors burning at th! approach of light 3. 


Yai: s 


Juſt 


T he Roman Empreſs. 


Juſt ſo your Majeſty the Sun offends 
When he his courſe begins, or when he ends. 

Th' arrival of the night gives you no eaſe; 

That of the day your torments does-inereaſe, 

To me your ſervant why d'you'thus affect 

To hide the cauſe, who tell you the effedt ? 

Ful. What ſhall T do? confeſlions of our crimes ' 
In Princes are worſe crimes then they themſelves ; 
And which, if I ſtrive longer to conceal, alide, 
This forced ſilence will at laſt reveal : : 
Let then my will, 

Which in- an Empreſs ſheuld be fole Commander, 
The voluntary firſt eruption make. 

Antonia, thou ſhalt now know my diſeaſe, 

But let compaſſion mollifie thy heart 
Conformable to the grief, which I ſuffer. 

Who the diſtre(s'd relieve, muſt firſt reſent, 
And feel the torment of the Patient. 

Florws, that name ſo grateful to Antonia, 

But more to me. 

Florus, 1 ſay to thee, {o acceptable. 

Ant. Madam, *tis true, 'twas he 
Who firſt to my Servilins me united. ' 

Ful. And me has diſunited from my ſelf, 
My Prince, the world, and all things but himſelf. 
Florus more fair, more beautiful than 
Morning or midnight ſtar, more lovely then 
The pleaſant Sun himſelf, when heſhines through 
The golden Fleece of the celeſtial Ram, 

DÞ}O how I am, 
With love tranſported.. Art. True 3 
But 'tis, T hope, of your Yalentiws. 

Ful. No; 'tis not : yes, it is 3 I mean of him: 
Not what he is, but what he was 3 in Flor 
Me thinks I ſee Yalertizs reviv'd, 

And my old flames : Love has 
Retrac'd the ſame or ee in 


My fancy, which kiadled my firſt deſires. 


Nature 


1+ The Roman Empreſs. 


Nature pave the ſame features to their faces, 
And to their minds-and bodies the ſame graces. 
Such ſprightlineſs was in Yalextius looks, 
When firſt he courted me: 
Such was his comely geſture, when on horſeback 
The ſtately courſer proud was of his burden. 
Thus ſmil'd he, thus he frown'd, and in his anger 
Became more lovely from the change of paſlions. 
Marvel not then, that ſo great a Commander 
So ſoon has conquer'd, and mflam'd the breaſt, 
Alas ! of a poor Lady. i 18 
Ant. Theſe heats ſhould be ſuppreſt in their beginning, 
Ful. And (o they might ; did they like other fires 
Grow by ſucceſſion 3 but they maſterleſs 
Like lightning, found expanſion in an inſtant 
Through all my. veins, inflaming all my ſpirits. 
Ant. Caſt off theſe vain ſurmiſes, and be ſure 
the thought you may be cur'd, is half the cure. 
Let not your Majeſty herein perſever, 
We ſafely ſin ſometimes, ſecurely never. 
Strangle theſe vile thoughts in their infancy. 
Fal. This I have oft endeavour'd, but tn vain ' 
— So whilſt that I 
Am thus conſum'd by an internal fire, 
Scarce daring to let it evaporate 
In words, in ſighs, int&#s like other lovers 
The heart increaſing, multiplies within 
My breaſt, and will, I fear, at laſt for want | 
Of vent deſtroy me. 
Ant. Madam, theſe thoughts ſhould have no-vent, but find 
At once their birth, and burial in your mind. 
Ful. My vital heat, and this more vital of 
My love, are ſubſtances inſeparable 3 
Nay, if the nature of my foul ſhall not prove 
Mortal, I fear that will not of my love: 
$9 that to ſave my honor if Idie, 
I] am not ſure to end my milerie. 
Wilt thou not then afford me thy compaſſion > 


Ant. 


The Roman.Empreſs. 15 
Art. Toher who voluntary cafts her felf C 
In miſerie, what ptty can be due?" . 
| Fl. O 'tis againſt my will; love like a Tyrant has 
Reduc't my ſoul, and all her facutties 
In vaſſalage : Virtue lets fall her arms, 
As weak, and uſeleſs, 'againft ſuch  pow'rful charms. 
Ant.' Think on the violation of your faith. 
Fxl. T have, and find, that centbany is only 
A force imaginary in us women : WON 
I find it by my ſelf. 4»t. But not by others. 
Ful. Canſt ſee me periſh, and afford no fuccour ? 
Ant. Want of afliſtance in'this kind preſerves you. 
My ſuccor in this caſe would make you periſh. 
Ful. Thy Empreſs ſubmiſlively intreats, 
And wilt thou not obey 2 Ant. learn to command, 
And firſt your ſelf, and then I ſhall obey. 
I am your ſervant, not ſlave of your vice. 
Ful. Canſt thou a Lover be, :and yet ſo cruel? 
Ant. My love I keep confin'd within due limits. 
Ful. Contrivers of crimes ſecretly committed 
In Courts, ſecurely ſtill advance: themſelves, 
Without the loſs of fame, or reputation. 
Ant. We doubly erre; if errmg we procure 
Th' opinion, that we have conſerv'd our honor. 
Ful. If weapprovein Princes 
ACtions unjuſt for private int'reſt , why not 
Thoſe more excuſable for private pleaſare.? 
A hidden fault was never entire crime. 
Ant. That which is voluntary, is entire. 
Ful. But notin Princes, who being publick perſons, 
Their vices, if not publick, are not vices 3 
Nor private virtues eſteem'd Princely virtues. 
"Tis cruelty not to afliſt th' afflicted. 
Ant. Not when contrivers of their own misfortunes. 
Ful. O thou art obſtinat. At..'Tis conſtancy. 
Ful, "Tis craelty. At. 'Tis generoſity. 
Ful. Ingratitude inthe moſt high degree. 
Ant, Greateſt beneficence..' 'Ful.. Thy Princes hater. 


Ant. 


16 The Roman Empreſs., 
Ant. A lover of herhonor, and my own. 
Fxl. No more Antonia : ſhall Tlive, or die ? 
Ant. Then loſs of honor, death's leſs miſerie. 
Ful. What ſhall I do? my reaſon having loſt, 

Whiles fury guides me, I rove ſtrangely toſt, 

I know not where, buit certainly aſtray, 

Where honor ſuffers mad love tolead the way. 


Arſeniws. Honorius. Florys putting up his ſword. 


Flo. No, no; Ican't believeit; *tis almoſt 
Tmpoſlible, that he ſhould be my Father, 
Who ſecks thus to deprive me of my honor, 
In forfeiting my duty to my Prince. 

— Acknowledge in pure gift 

Thy life from my unlucky ignorance 

Of him, who is my Father. 

Hon. Brave Flores, this new field maintain, 

Which virtue has laid open with intention 

To fignalize thy valor 1n all kinds. 

Nature her ſelf thow here fubdueſt, not works 

Of human art or hand.z and which'is moſt, 

None in this conqueſt, bur thy ſelf can boaſt. ' - 
Ar. My Son. Fl. My Enemy. Ar. My only Son. 
Flor. My greateſt Enemy. Ar. Thou know'(tI ſeek 

Thy happineſs, and canft thou injure me ? 

Flo. Ts this an injury, to defend my ſelf 

From th'undermining pradtice-of a Traytor ? 

Ar. Canſt thou ſubmit to ſerve a Prince, who is 

An enemy to him, who gave thee being. 

Flo. Suppoſe you did, will you on this account 

Rob me of my well-being, fame, and honor ? 


Ar. Diſguiſ'd here in theſe abje&t weeds, for thee - 


My grandour, and-my dignity, and life 
To hazard I expoſe. 
Flo. Return 3 thou. haſt free leave, .and reaſſume 
Thy Generalſhip under Hoſtilize : +14 abi 
It is my,glory 4n- the head of armics _. 


To 


T he Roman Empreſs. ” "0p 


To meet me as my adverſary 3 but 
My ſharhe, diſgrace, and ignominy to 
Reſpedt thee with the reverence of a Father. 
Ar. Cruel Batbarian, if thou diſpiſeſt 
Thy Father, from whom thou. enjoy'ſt this light 3 
At leaſt make ſome account of him, who 
To put thee in poſleflion of that . 
Thou lov'ſt above this light, thy fair Aurelia. 
Flo. When my affettion to Axrelie 
Shall be offenſive to Yalentize, 
Ile caſt it off. | 7 
Ar. Art thou reſolv'd to refuſeme all pity? 
Flo. I ſhall obſerve my duty to my Prince. 
Ar. Which ſhould give place to thy paternal duty, 
And is ingrafted in all breſts but thine 3 | 
Sis Known long before, . 
Private ambition, popular faction | 
Had laid the ruines, or the foundations 
Of Principalities, or Commonwealths, . 
Whence theſe names ſprang of loyalty, and honor. | 
The cruel Thracian, barbaraus Indian 9] 
Acknowledging no other law, know this : | 
So does th' inhoſpitable Scythian; | | | 
Who others bloul devouring, with his-own 


His aged fainting Sire will revive. 
Flo. My cruel fortune |! 


When thy looks faireſt are, how thou confound'ſt me? 

Here filial obligation,, ywhich-nature - - ,, ] 
Imprints not only in mens. hearts, but beaſts, : 

Challenges my obedience to a Father | 

Who not content to give me life, ſeeks here _ 

With hazard of his own, to make mine happy:.. 

On tt other fide my Price, who has prevented... 

My age, my merit, and my-.expettation, 

With heaping on me honors upon honors, 

Exacts more How me then my gratitude 

Equaliz'd to my wiſhes: could repay. | 

O how thus —_— —_— f ico) b 
I $4 ar 


- 


18 The Roman Empreſs, 
Far greater torment find tv live then die. !-_ | 
Hon. Florus, why thus perplext > what mm a dream > 
Diſpel theſe cloudy miſts, foltow the way, 
Where honor lights thee with her golden ray, 
Flo. Honoriwvs, thow haſt tarn'd the bakkace, which 
My trembling heart durſt neither way incline. : 
Ar. Unfortunate Arſerias ! 'what new hopes 
Canſt thou retain, when they ingrateful are, 
Which have ſuch benefits receiv'dfrom'thee ; 
The one is life, the other liberty. | 
Hon, T'oblige the innocent; to make him guilty, 
Is not a Gy _ - T 
Ar. Ah Florws; Tome 1 to'theſe hairs, -/ 
My Son, fome daty 's — = 4 wang Father. 
Let theſe my tears mollifie that heart, 
Which ſo inflexible ſeemsto wy prayers. 
Flo.. ———— Old man give over; + 
Thy words, and time we lolt inithis purſuit: ' , / 
Ar. ———— Raſh and'inbaman oreature, 
If thou diſpi(efſt the entreaties of a Father : 
Ne make thee ſearthe courage, 
And ſtratagems of an:oltl'Generat '' . ; + | 
Grown white under the helmer, 'andthe-rage 
OF an incenſed Enemy*:4akenrriws i 1 
Shall know Axrelia's thy intended Spouſe, 
_ thy private/Priend 1d fhall | 
is artifice arrive deprive thee bf 1 
Thy honor, and of that unworthy being,;- {1 1} 
Which I aworthibfitave alrewcies-: * 5400 re ; j 
Flo. O natnre, O my honor, ernel Dyrants-- | 
Of my divided ſont, how you diftrat me ! 
In what inextricable'la th 1270 wal 0 haggar 11 
Has my ill forttmie caftme 3 if conquer; it, 0 
Or yield ſubdu'd in this-urfkappy conflift-. ent gb ff 
Of my conteſting paſſions, and atteQions, 
I'm ſure to loſe my life, or repuration-3 
Or rather both, which my-ſad/rb o-prefage::. - | | 
. Hon. Feax nothing 3 be noe jeQed, whillt 7; 


Pe OST IRy  R" ;* 


The Raman Empreſe, 9 
Here's an Horeriws to give ſa ample 
A teſtimany of your innocence, 
Flo, Malicious datard, do thy worft, my clear 
incerity of mind, and attians ſhall 
rove, thou a Traytor canſtnot be my Father. 
Ar. Arſeniws, thou ſpend'ſt thy time, thy worde, 
_ labor here in vain ; come then prepare 
or thy revenge, | 
The world ſhall know what I moue to conceal. 
Flo, —Arſenixe hold : 
oo ſtay, and lets compoſe this cruel ſtrife 5 _ 
ou pretend only to haye giv'n me life, 
Which Ile return t* you ; opening thus my breft, 
'The paſlage will make entrance for my reſt x 
The bloud will be the balſam of my honar, 
And pay your debt, and fave my reputatian, 
Ar, Arſenivs, O thy unhappy fortune ! 
Which made thee Father, Souldier, or Commander! 
Live cruel Parricide, live, and prolong 
Thy odious life 3 Tle find ſome way todeath, 
And my repoſe : my ſelf I cannot ſhew 
A nal Packer, or ſoft-natur'd Foe. 
Hou, Florws, why thus caſt down? "tis ſtrange to ſes 
A man dejefted after vittory, | 
Here nothing was requir'd but a ſpeQators 
Of this moſt glorious paſſage of rhy life, 
Which the yropicieys apet of the heay 
Has granted thee in an Homorie, 
Florxs farewel 5 congratuilong thy happy 
Fortune to have preſerv'd a Friend, who ſeeks 
The preſervation of thy honors which : 
Thy Father, thou here loſeſt, ſought to ruine, Exit. 
Flo, There is no reaſon natyre unite 
By an uſurp'd authority thoſe minds, 
Virtue upon juſt grounds has ſeparated. 
But ſee th' Empreſs comes : I'm ſorry ſhe - 
Should find me in this cooflit of my paſſions, 


BH 2 : : Valuid 


20 T he Roman Empreſs. | 


Fulvia. Florus. 


Ful. Ladies retire within 3 I will be private. 1 
See here in finding Flor#s alone, a happy 
Occaſion is preſented by. my fortune alide... 


For the diſcovery of my paſſion (which 
As womens wits are beſt when they have leaſt 
Time to conſider) T have found already. 
Tle tell him that I hear his love aſpircs 
To the polleſſion of a Royal Lady, | 
Who meets his flames with, mutual fire, commending 
Herein his choice; ſo by this artifice 
He ſhall perceive my love in a ſurprize. 
Florws, ul war is th* occaſion of this ſadneſs, 
VVhen th'Emperour ſo much applauds your conduQ ? 
Flo. Madam,to.ſee the egemy provide | 
Againſt us a more vigorous aſſault. 
Ful. *Tis but a new. occaſion for your triumph. 
I know the real cauſe of this diſturbance. 
O Florxs you aſpire to great matters. 
'Fh.” Servilizs or my Father has betray'd me. aſide. 
Fl. Nay I commend your courſe, *twas virtue which | 
Diſtinguiſht, and made Princes-firſt 3 beſides | 
Love's a great leveller like death, and where 
He finds not an equality, will make it. 


Flo. -T ſhall be of the Court 
Now, and the Camp the laughing-ſtock and ſport. aſide. 


Ful. If you defir'd ſuch ſecreſie, you ſhould not 
Make one the obje& of your love, ſo near 
In bloud to me allied. 
'Ffor. Aurelia 1s her Niece *tis very true : aſide. 
If I perſiſt, this ſilence 'will convince me. | | 
Let not your ſacred Majeſty be thus 
Abul\'d by falſe reports; my Princes favor 
And yours (as ever happens in great Courts) | 
Have raiſ'd me private enemies, which ſeek | 
My ruia from theſe falle ſuggeſtions.. | 
be - =? F al» 


. 


Wot \ 1 


The Roman Empreſs. 21 
Fyl. No, no; here's no-place for the leaſt ſuſpicion 

Againſt the teſtimony of this truth ,'''1: * gr 3 ob 
Which trom the Ladies lips proceeds, who loves you 3 
Which here this Medal better will declare , - gives bim-a 
Then words, which through reſpet of you, and of Medal. 
My ſelf T cannot utter. TL © 79 ft: 
Confront this with th' orignal;, and ſee: | 


If ſhe be well expreſt, who thus affe&s:you. ; \. Exit. 
Flo. Let's fee if the Inſcription ſhew the ſame | 
Perſon, the picture ſeems to repreſent. turns about the 
Fulvia Empreſs, ſecond Wife of Valentine, Oc. Medal. 


Ts this ſome real paſfage, -or 1llaffon ? 

Perchance I dream, and nbw-ſome lively: viſions 
Play the Impoſtors on my deluded fancy. 

T wiſh it were ſo ; but that ſcarce can be ; 

For though in dreams we think our ſelves awake,, 
Yet really awake we know we dream. not. 

No, I am the loſt miſerable Florwwity: : 

And this the cruel Fxlvia, who deſtroys me 3 

And which is ſtrange; with love 3 a ſtronger engine- 
Erected for my ruine, then her hatred. 

Who can eſteem me innocent? whilſt I 


Am flexible thought to ſo foul a crime. 
Blaſt me ye heavens, or et at leaſttheſe looks,, 


Which pleaſe the Empreſs : if my heart be chalt, 
They are laſcivious, and my honor ſtain : 
And this ſufficient is to make me guilty 
Was ever caſe hke mine ? If I declare 
My ſelf a lover then I loſe my friends 3 
And if T am beloy'd, my Prince I injure 
In higheſt point of honor, and whar's ſtrange; 
Th'offendor is ut both wayes innocent. Exit.. 


Antonia: 


"Tis ſtrange my Huſbands love ſhould fade ſo ſoon,. 
Which IT have ſought to cnltivate with all 
Art, duty, offices which can become «© 


72 The Roman Empreſs. 


A ſubtle woman, or complacent wife. 
Perchance I am deceiv'd, and with ſome falſe 
Surmiſe ereate within my ſelf true torment, 
' OGeloſicz o thou | daughter 

Of thy blind father Love, of whom art laſt 
Thou prov'ſt the murd'rer : thou of all-things only 
Deteſted, loathed,hated by thy ſelf z 
Ingenious only in the. ſearching after - ©: 7x60 
That, which then wiſheſt could not be found out 
Or being found, leaves thee in greater torment. 

Since 1n ſo ſhort a time-thy. venom has 
Spread through my veins, and poifon'd all my thoughts ; 
Return to thy infernal manſion, where 
Hatred begot thee, though perchance ſome ſbare 
Love in thy generation might have, 
To make thy birth double, and ſo more monſtrous : ' 


There be a torment tothy ſelf, and fince 21h I 


Suſpicions are thy choiceſt nouriſhment, 
Vex = ſelf with new fears 3 never (ecure, 
As well with thoſe which doubtful ate, as ſure. 


To. her Servitins, 


Ser. Here comes my poor. Amtonie,. methinks, '  _ 
The ſad reproach of myi Tz 

Ant. What cauſe have Tgiv'w you of late to be 
So much diſguſted with mycompany 2 +: 

Ser. None, but ſome other flames tare im my breſt_ 
Extinguiſht thine, and rob/merof my reſt. 

Ant. What can theſe ſtrange looks, or this laupuage mean? 
I hope Sir, you intend no breach of faith, 

Ser.' No, I am forc'd to it againſt my intention, -: 
Againſt — former vows, and my own wiſhes, 
Ant. Weall confeſs, Sir, this unqueſtion'd truth, 
= will cannot be forc't, though it rebel, 
By any power on earth, in heaven, or hell. 

Ser. If here's an erros, . Flerws ſhould be rathes  -.- 
Accuſ 'd then I : he, who firſtjoyn'd our loves, -_ | 


The Roman, Empr eſs, 23 
Has been the occaſiqn of diffplviag them,. 
In ſhewing me a face of late ini/beauty | 
So far —— thine, Þ 
That 'twere imp tety not to adore jt. 
Ant. Falſe and diſloyal man 3 
Florss and thou ſhalt fink under rhe force - AE, ro | 
Of my revenge, provok't to {ach a heights. . .- el 11 
Tt ſhall plck on you both untimely fate. *- : 
Ser. Antonia, divert the torrent of 
This furious rage ſome other way 3, accuſe 
rs. _—_ to ay = e-tOrment mY ny, 
is beauty form'd, fo gxcelling thine, fel, | 
As the — does the leſſer ſtars-out+ſhine. | 
Ant. Traytor accuſe thy one pentidiouſneſy, 
Which makes thee change thy oa mts and thy cuſtoms. 
Ser. I have chang'd the, object 
Ant. Th' haſt broke thy; faith 3. po tt a. a infamons- | 
T hope in her thoy foll ,. thou. wilt fee . ,,.. 
SR equal to my love of AYE | 20709 4 
Ser. Antonia examining thy 
Accuſe that vulgar beauty, thy face, 
Which on my free-born ſoul has had no charms 


More pow'rtul, and _—_— cojours. Exits 
yg 

Go, if my beauty be of cncimely fate, 

In my revenge @&þall yot hethngy hore 40 

To perfe& which, Iheaven, and hel will move : 

"Tis th' only xr -iggur gloves, , 


Nature, and Fortune cruel, 
Are to us women -: #d agar 
Our Fathers Palaces t0-98-2x6 
Where nor our Ping Taro nc lee anGee "1 , 4 


vw 1 


And afterward, when quy;aj aeac'd + 
Should change this bondage iy — 7 TY 
We only of all creatunes : -AVG+J 
With a vaſt dowry oux-aya 
Thus only changing a' new! 
ary purchaſe to mile@r aprd 


24. The Romay 73% 
And caſt us off thus when he pletfe/” Mawvit -- 

A bold inſojent creaturez' grand'uſutper: a: s 
Upon the rights of nature ; not by his wit : 

(For in our age of folly weenflave him) +-- 4 4 
But by his force, and "He makes Javes - — | 
Partial t' himſelf, rigid'to 88% *hwſivows! © i! -- This B07 
He breaks, ours muſt bk pes hisVIces OD NON GY! 
Paſs wy for his gallantries ; '6iirs are” "tf 17707 7 
Branded with foul and horrid'names 4 affght Us. 


Ambition in us, in hitt -ts howor ; - '-© 21/20 
And our irregular appetites hin - ” ; and] nf ont 


Paſs for the noble palliigs -— ON 14 3EGS 2h) 
Not only to be excuP'd;** Dive 'cEnnendely"' OIrg 2412 2G 
Who made*'theſe laws andicuſtoms ? did © our e Sex | | 
_ ve up their: _ and ſuffrage $'- | IHE 


there's no ti Su or ebRpo rhe 21; n IS Y I% 
We « ſhout& obey. thels- wes Winding 1d Fic! ID ac | 
So partial Judges : th' Enpreſyind if» 5 tr 497 nf got } 


If yr © | 4 

To vindicate our ſexes libertie,” ' TOE ut £2 1109 7 Exit 
Edit, of i2d DAINITIEN L.A "vo 
"NODINS Se KO3DER OIL] oa Abe; 


"at on hid ef bn; | 700-2911 ye D Did 
=== 
# 0} —— — ER 


EST vl: 1c} 
Florus, Soros Wa; Carbs: - Ne II Crs 17 
IS 419VR 21 AMoidy Bt EÞ; 09 


» Ss OM 
Car. That which nb OO ia Tecret oF"! 021 vino '{; zT* 
Importance, that Ar BIAj bl" 112 9018107 LR 91097; 
Your Father, and converte here #i owe Camp!” vt Ris p1 oy & 
Flo. *Tis Truez but I atti ow relating to'yow i 12112 114 
Th' occafftor'whith Has broiight Warelrd hithes.- 7] 110 107 120 8 
The wild luſt of her Father, \M6t Eonterſt 17>! dar Larmrons bofh 
To violate the chaſtity of Virgins; * gnghnod eidy 91 -y fo bi imo? 
The faith of Matrons, Widows'vows-; avlafe72 1's to yinm 5 vy 
Laſciviouſly incroached on kivDanghesr $0 VIvwG Þ lay & 1 _ q 
The horror of w wo &T& Frighitet] hep 141: 9 To 21 i G 
(Sugh was her v 6&) Uſe ſonghiet 03 2:6thuzug 2 


Her 


T he Roman Empreſs 25 


Her refuge from her enemies, and fled 
From him her Father, as her greateſt foe. 
So by this means fortine affords my arms 
Th' happy occaſion of protecting virtue, 
T think her ſelf in a corporeal ſhape. 

Ser. This paſſion of your love ſtrangely deceives you. 
Virtue needs no external form, or beauty | 
Seldom puts any on 3 and yet more ſeldom 
"Tis that they can agree. 

Chictly in Courts, like jarring Elements, 
Where one proves the confuſion of the other 3 
Beauty at leaſt to Virtue ever fatal. | 

Car. He tells you true, the outward ſhape of your 
Aurelia ſhews no internal goodneſs. 

Flo. . Sure correſpondent to 
Th' external ſplendor muſt be lodg'd in her 
A ſoul deſerving ſuch an habitation 5 
As greater luſtre of ſome ſparkling jewels 
Denotes in them no leſs intrinſique virtue. 

Car. T can compare Amrelia's eyes to ſtars 
As bright as you, but of ill influence , 

And look on her arrival to the Camp, 
Like the approach of ſome ill threatning Comet, 
Th' heavens preſerve our General, and us. 

Flo. What raiſes theſe ſtrange Omens of my love, 
Which ſome will envy, but the moſt approve. 

Scr. Moſt will condemn, others oppoſe ; think not 
Aurelia's beauty will not raiſe you Rivals, 

To bring the Prize in conteſtation. 

Flo. Theſe motives of vain fear I ſcorn 3 farewel, 
Tle ſeek ſome other friends to gratulate , 
The happineſs of my triumphing fate, Exit. 

Car. TI am amaz'd to think Arſenizs, 

Great Captain General of our enemy, 
Should be his Father ; and here in diruiſe 
Converſe within our Camp. Ser. *Tis a ſtrange ſecret, 

Car. To me it ſeems improbable, that he 

Who was ſurpriz'd with the meer ſhadow of 


E His 


26 The Roman Empreſs. 


His Miſtreſs, ſhould remain inflexible 
To the tears and entreaties of a Father ; 
Whart's your opinion ? Ser. Fhat we play the fool! 
Egregiouſly 5 remember we are Souldiers 
As well as Courtiers 3 lets caſt off this diſſembling. 
Car. .Since you advance, Tle meet you : Sir I hear 
Of your intention of divorce, to make 
Room for Aurelia's entrance m your bed; 
Whoſe love I ſeek with as great fervency 
As you 3 we both forfeit our hopes, if this: 
Rival be not remov'd ; th'eftefting which 
His open folly has made eaſje.. Ser. True 
As Scholars prove ill Souldiers, ſo theſe Souldiers 
Prove the worſt Courtiers 3 their franc and gen'rous natures 
Make them as unfit for the air of Courts, 
As birds are for the Element of water. 
Who but a General bred up in Camps 
Like Florws, ſuch a ſecret would reveal, 
On which divulg'd, his ram does depend, 
To us, who ſhall raiſe our ſelves from his fall.. 
Car. In Court it would a Solceciſm appear, 
So groſs an error ſhould uapuniſke go: 
There is no reaſon for't,, he muſt give way, 
Though both of us can't have this ary prey : 
And conſequently in our Ger'rals fall, 
The one of us muſt find his Funeral. Exeunt;. 


Valentins, Statilius, Honorims, with Conrt-Attendants, &c. 


Val. Statiliws, the Gods are equally 
Willing to make us great, as afterwards 
They are averſe long to conſerve that greatneſs, 
We often ſee our fall, or miſerie 
Bring up the rear of our proſperitie. 
Sta. Your Majeſty knows well that our condition 
Admits not of a ſincere happineſs, 
Without the mixture of ſome diſcontent, 
Fal. Whilſt ztaly and the Provinces appland. . 


Mr 


The Roman Empreſs. 
My victories, and happineſs, T fear, © + 
And yet perceive no true cauſe of my fear. 
Hor. *Tis generouſly to be rejefted then, 
As being grounded upon no foundation. 
val. Thence it takes deeper root. Old Marmers 
Expet a horrid tempeſt, when the ſea 
Rouls boyſtrous waves, and yet no winds are ſtirring. 
Laſt night, or rather 'twixt the confines of 
The day and night, the lively, but the diſmal 
nt An of a dream have fo tormented 
My ſpirit, I ſhall have no quiet till 
I ſee the menacing effetts blown over. 
Hor, Theſe are deceptions of the fancy, not 
Deſerving the attention of a Prince. 
Val. So often verifid in all reports 
Who can aſſure us theſe are fallacies ? 
Hon. The rare, divine, admired Epicaras, 
Who with the light of reaſon has diſpel'd 
Theſe golden fears, theſe terrifiers of 
The vulgar ſpirits 3 did you but imagine 
Th' innumerable multitude of ſuch 
Who either will deceive, or be decerv'd : 
Nothing ſo beneficial you'l ſee 
As a tions increduhitie. 
Sta. *Tis a ſigne of a poor and mollifi'd 
Spirit to fear all events of this nature; 
And to fear nothing a ſtapiditie. 
Hon. A virtue Sir, if once opinion can 
Remove us from our ſolid ſtation, 
We never after ſhall firm footing find. 
An underſtanding muſt be, to ſee clear, 
Purg'd from all ſuperſtition and fear. 
pal. Tt is an happinels to be reſolutc 
In our opinions, though erroneous. 
O that T could like thee, Honorixe, 
Believe theſe terrcrs follies : my dream was, 
That my dear Wife, and eldeſt Son';z O horror? 
Before we ſce the Sun once more aſcend * - 
E 2 To 


'28 The 'Roman Empreſs. 

To his meridian altitude, ſhould fall -. 

At my feet murder'd by-me in furious rage. 
Sta. The vanity herein appears, that in 

The ſhort extent of one dayes compals ſo 

Horrid a fa&: maſt be'accompliſht, which. 

Requireth years for the matujing of it.. 

The innocence and virtue of the, Empreſs, 

And Prince are yet unblemiſht, inſuſpeted. 
Val. "Tis true 5 but if the fates will make Yalertias 

Unhappy, they will make him firſt imprudent. 
Hun. The happineſs of great YVakntis 

Depends upon the will of great Yalentixe : 

Not upon, fortune, or deſtiny. . 

Theſe are but idle names of 1dle Writers, 

— Unhappily;invented, 

To terrifie mankind, and ſow the ſeeds: 

Of error, folly, ſuperſtition,in us + + 

Who ſhould rely on jor own proper virtues 5 

For man is only on himſelf dependant 3 

Not fate, nor fortune. - nox: his ſtars. Aſcendant. 
Val. Thinkft thou not ſome celeſtial pow'rs above 

Dire& the courſe of our affairs? ' -Hor. No Sir 

They reſt ſecure, happy not thinking on them, 

Nor us, ſuch little crawlers here on earth. 

Nor is it human wit, '/bat rather human - 

Folly, which now ſeems-the diſpoſer of them. 

Obſerve but with what vermin the age ſwarms, 

And how the world is ſtrangely peopled with. 

Armies of murderers in ambitious -wars 3 

Or elſe the inſtruments of our luxury. 
Val. T am told by my Philoſophers at Court, 

Conful'd, and interrupted.dreams are nct 

To be regarded ; but when that order is 

In them which was in mine, they are adviſes 

From heaven ſent to tell us what ſhall happen. 
Hon. —— — —Ji the diſtracted Chaos 

There never was greater confaſion, 

Then is in them, and in their. mad opinions; 


Which 


TOO EPI 


The Roman Empreſe. 


Which no more credit ſhould find in-us, then 
Poetique fancies, or fanatique dreams. 

Sta. For my part 3 
Fre ſince I firſt open'd my eyes to make 
Inſpection into the darkneſs cf | 
Human affairs, and nature, I ſtreight ſaw 


, Nothing was ſuited to our capacities 5 


But ever thought Philoſophers, and ſuch 

Who give themſelves up to their contemplations. 

Moſt ignorant, and uſele(s of all men. 

Hon. — —— They firſt corrupt our natural wit, 

And judgement with an artificial folly, 

And then our genuine cuſtoms with learn'd vices. 
Sta. Rome, as ſhe grew more learned, grew lels valiant. 
Hon. Thele ſtudies in her Senators deſtroy'd 

That bravery im them , which ſubdu'd the world. 
Sta. Science, and vice like twins at the ſame time 

Found birth in her, and grew up to perfection. 

Hon. She ow'd her ruin to no other caule, 

Then when ſhe chang'd from Martial to be learn'd. 
Sta. O let it not be ſaid that this diſeaſe, 

In the corrupting of the judgement of 

The great Yalentizs, twice (ſhould fatal be 

Thus to the Roman Name, and Majeſtie. 

Val. T am of no ſuch accidents afraid, 

Where prudence cr my will can give me aid. 

Hon. We boldly ſhould contemn, not fear thoſe ils, 

Which cannot be oppoſed by our wills. 

Val. To foſter hopes is a meer vanitie 

When we foreſee certain our miſerie. 

Sta. A Prince who thus thinks that his State impairs 

A fruitleſs ſubject gives himſelf of cares. 

Val. He rightly thinks of fortune, who ſuſpects 

Her various 1n the perſons ſhe atfects, 

Hon. The change of fortune rather ſhould erect 

The ſpirit of an Emperour, then dejeCt. 
val. Unhappy ſtate of Princes ! whom her favours 

Sometimes betray, more then her frowns 3 for they 


29 


Cor- 


The Roman Empreſs. 
Corrupt us, and our natures mollifie : 
We gain our honor in adverſitic. 


Ful via. 

What ſhallT do ? ſuſtain the gravitie, 
And perſon of imperial Majeſtic ? 
Or loſe the hopes elſe of an ardent lover, 
Rebellious allions of my diſtracted ſoul, 
Fear, love, deſire, envy : why d'ye thus 
Torment my mind with ſeparated factions ? 

Though thou art here a mo(t unjuſt Uſurper, 
Love, T'le my ſelfrather ſubmit to thee : | 
Divided power is greater _—_— 
Speak then, and hope 3 happy ſucceſs may make 
Our impious aCtions paſs for honorable, 
Much more the faults of love, which in all breſts 
Find their Apologies 3 for no man ſhall, 
Seeing Florus, not ablolve the Criminal : 
And Ladies, which have known him, cannot chuſe, 
But ſay the-cauſe brings with it the excuſe. 


To ber Florus. 

m—_ O here he comes 

As I expected ! Florxs, T hope you have 

Confronted the Original with the 

Pourtrai& I gave you, and fre plea('d with both. 
Flo. Your Majeſty was not deceiv'd, I ſhall 

Declare my ſelf an encmie to thoſe, 

Who ſhall their treachene practiſe on that beauty. 
Ful. Now T am happy, I perceive he loves me. 

Let no ſuſpicious or Lk torment you 5 

You only then need fear a Rival, when 

Another Florys ſhould be Jike your ſelf. 


Flo. In breſts where love has no admiflion found, 


Gelofie can find none 3 he need not fear 
A Rival, whono lover is. Fxl. Not you 
A lover ; can The ſo much deceiv'd ? 
Flo. Yes; when my reaſon ſhall dire the paſſion. 


Ful. 


The Roman Empreſs, 


Ful. Love joyn'd with reaſon 
Ts a monſter, and not that noble gheſt, 
Which ſhould command all in a Princes breſt 3 
Fear, counſel, realon either chaſing thence, 
Or elſe reducing to his obedience. 
Flo. My honor then muſt regulate my actions, 
Ful. Which never ſhould inſpire a noble heart 
With cruelty, but rather with compaſſion 
Of a diſtreſſed Lady. Florws, you 
Knew that to be Fulvia's Picture, I gave you. 
.Flo. 'Tis true, and as T think by ſome miſtake 
Unluckily convey'd into theſe hands. 
Ful. No Sir, be not deceiv'd, the preſent was 
Made by mature eleGion. 
Flo. I reverence it as your gift, and as 
The Pourtrait of my Soveraign adore it. 
Ful. The name of Soveraign is unſuitable 
To my afteCtion, or my preſent ſtate : 
Call me your ſervant ; that familiar tearm. 
Becoms him, who predominats o're all 
The powers of my ſoul. 
Diſdain not one, who ever hath preſerv'd 
Her reputation unſtain'd, her faith 
Inviolated, and to you alone 
Commits them both 3 one action of my life 
Should not reproach me with inconſtancie.. 
Compaſſionate an Empreſs, who entreateth 
That uſed to command : O Florzs, put 
A period to my life, or to my torment. y 
Flo. O ye immortal Gods, #lide.. 
Can you ſee this offence, and ſuffer it ? . 
I hope your Majeſtie will harbor thoughts 
Which more become your royal dignitie 3 
And of your own diſhonor, and my ſhame, 
In hearing mention'd this licentious flame. 
Ful. Tf it be lawleſs, 'twill the more aſpire; 
Reſiſtance will prove vain to my deſire. 
Flo, O Madam, let reaſon trumph.above: 


32 The Roman Empreſs. 
This paſſion, and honor over your love 3 
Think how I am the Subjet of Yalentixs. 
Ful. Sufficient curb to this repulſe ſhould be 
The thought how a great Empreſs loves you; and 
Loves you alone; and the Commandreſs of 
The world ſubmits her ſelf to your commands. 
Flo. I can't conceive your Majeſtie as Empreſs, 
But at that time Wife allo of my Soveraign. 
Ful. Tf you defire happineſs, think only 
Of my Imperial dignitie and power. 
Flo. Who by their paſſions thus enflay'd have loſt 
Their libertie, cannot of power boaſt. 
' Ful. Tf thou deſpiſeſt an obſequious lover, 
Thou ſhalt the rage fear of an incenſt Lady. 
Flo. I apprehend more danger from the love, 
Then anger of her who deſpiſes honor, 
Ful. If thy audacious infolence contemns 
My threatnings, their effects ſhall make thee tremble. 
; Flo. No violence, no hidden treacherie 
Can afiright him, who never fear'd to die. 
Ful. If that which I intend 
An ignominious death cannot thee move, 
hou haſt leſs ſenſe of honor, then of love. 
Flo. Which cannot be, when the occaſion only, 
Springs from the hatred of an immodeſt woman. 
Fl. Thou ſhalt feel miſerie. Flo. T can conquer it. 
Ful. Thou ſhalt repent. Flo. No, I am ever conſtant, 
Ful. Tlc be reveng'd. Flo. I can defend my (elf. 
Ful. To {light a Lady never was unpuniſht. 
Flo. Offence of honor can't be tollerated. 
Ful. My hatred now ſhall equalize my love. 
Flo. And my contempt my former reverence. 
Ful. O thou unhappy Fulvia ! what does it 
Avail thee to be Empreſs of the world, 
And canſt not make thy ſelf belov'd or fear'd. 
Flo. O mi(crable Florys, to what purpoſe 
C:n ſerve thy innocence, if thou becom'ſt 
The odious object of anothers crime. 


 - ” 


Exit. 
Ful. . 


The Roman Empreſs. 33 


Fyl. Ah cruel creature ! he is gone : if ever 
Any had cauſe to murmur againſt nature, 
'Tis I, in giving him, ſo like Yalentins, 
A form and ſhape fatal to my repoſe. 
I cheriſht the firſt heat, enter'd my breſt 
Inſerſibly as an acquainted gheſt : 
But ſeeking after how it did aſpire, 
I found my nuptial torch lighted this fire : 
So that I can't reproach my ſelf with ſhame, 
My firſt and lawtul love kindling this flame : 
Then all the fault's in him, who thus rejects me. 
O thou diſdain, the conquerour of love, 
Which conquers all things elſe, enter my breſt ; 
There, till revenge expel thee, take no reſt : 
Incenſt by thee, let all my ſpirits aſpire, 
Mixing in combat with this tyrannique fire 
For victorie. A Princeſs thus incenſt 
With love, and rage thus, more is to be fear'd, 
Then cruel fires, ons plagues, devouring ſeas, 
Or what moſt terrifies our human nature. 


To ber Aurelia. 


An. You Majeſtie is mach perplext, that paſhon” 
Is alwaies great, which can't contain it ſelf. 
Ful. T muſt conceal to her th' unlucky motive aſide. 
Of my diſturbance. Alas ! Aurelia, 
My miſeries are ever fruitful in 
Producing others : ſcarce my tears are dry'd 
For the late loſles of our Family 3 
But I muſt new ſupplies find, to lament 
The freſh diſgrace now falling on my iſſue. 
Au. Who can be ſo unjuſt to injure you ? 
Or who can be ſo arrogant offend 
That pow'r, which is ( armed for revenge ? 
Ful. Valentizs ; enemie of his own children, 
Becauſe I think they're mine, or elſe becauſe 
They are Nephews of Hoſtilixs your Father, 
F intends 


24. The Roman Empreſs. 
Intends that Flor#s ſhall be now advanc't 
To the Imperial dignitie, to their 
And my perpetual reproach, that Flor, 
Th' oppreſlor of my Father, and who ſeeks 
The ruin now of yours. Ax. A happy occaſion 
Opens a field to the triumphant paſlage 
Of my revenge 3 I can my ſelf diſcloſe 
Now to ſo great an enenye of Florys. aſide. 
O let that beauteous ſerenitie, 
Madam, return, which uſ'd Yadorn your Iooks. 
_ —— Y have open'd your diſeaſe 
To the Phyſitian, who alone can cure you. 
Ful. Who you ? become of late an enemie 
To your own father, intereſſed in 
The quarrel of Yalentizs againſt him. 
An. Your Majeſtie's deceiv'd, I only act 
A counterfeited part 4 F have defam'd 
- My Father as attemptor 
Upon my virgin modeſtie, that T 
The better might ſecure his tott'ring power: 
T fain my ſelf in love with Florws 3 an 
My flight here to Yalentizs, as my refuge, 
ThatTI more ſefely may procure their ruin. 
Ful. Aurelia, we are then in the ſame mt'reſt, 
Wil, and affetion more conjoin'd, then blond. 
I Arſenins has let me know 
Of late a ſecret, which will-raiſe yoar wonder 3 
How Florus is his Son, and how he 1s 
In love with me, ſeeking a mutual love 3 
Which underſtanding, with norice of my Father 
T fill'd the old mans head with hopes, and joy 
Of my affe&tion for his Son, to whom he has ſhews her a letter. 
A letter writ here on thar-very ſubjett, 
Apt either to make him deſert his Prince, 
In hope of gaining me 3 or elſe accuſe him 
Of treaſon 1n his correſpondence with 
Arſcerius enemie of Valentine 3 


Who thus abuſ'd ſhall fee himſelf depriv'd 


Of 


The Roman Empreſs 35 


Of this his Gen'ral, our great w—_— 

Ful. My Brothers preſent danger, and my Sons 
Diſgrace, whoſe fame Florzs eclipſes, makes 
Him ſubje& of my hatred 3 and the mem'ry 
Of my poor Father, murderd by Yalentixe, 
Makes him alike. Ax. Madam, then let us ſtrive 
To bereveng'd of both 3 
And with an emulation, who ſhall put 
Her malice into ſpeedieſt execution 3 
Not doubting of ſucceſs : 'Tis great aſſurance 
To thoſe, = & ſeek revenge, to have fo faithful 
Companions in the ſtratagems, as you have, 

Ful. 'Tis true my dear Aurelia, let me embrace thee 
For this thy brav'ry 3 though I envy it, 

So far advancing thy unriper years. 

An. This day ſhall ſhew here what the furious rage 
Of an ambitious Lady can produce z 
And theintereſt and geloſte of State, 

And emulation, Madam, of your glory. 

Ful. Expe& from me all, that can be expeQted 
From a contriving ſubtle wit, and cunning 
Hypocrifie joyn'd with a perfect malice. 

An. Let Florus, let Valentins percelye 
TH entrance of Awrelia in their Camp. 

Let fear and modeſty, companions of 
Our ſex, ſo much enclin'd to virtue, be 
Now caſt off by the thoughts of our revenge. 

Ful. My vaſſion ſhall eſteem no fin unliſenc'd. 
In me let one crime ſtill beget another; 

And let it not be thought a crime, which does 
Not multiply it ſelf in many others; 
And ever with increaſe, the latter greateſt, 

Au. Madam miſtake not 3 and let nothing paſs 
With us for criminal, but what is virtuous. 

Ful. "Tis the delightful fruit of vice to think, 
That no vice, which is cauſ('d by intereſt. 

An. True of our ſelves, better then that of ſtate z 


Which no great Prince values at any rate, 
| F 2 Ful. 


26 The Roman Empreſs. 


Ful. They never elfe in. Court or Camp would find, 
With all their pomp, tranquility of thind, 

Au. "Tis on this ground that T'le prepare to a&t 
Thoſe things I cannot think, unleſs enrag'd. 
Poſteritie ſhall ever curſe, though ſcarce 
Believe that, which Fle put in execution. 

Ful. Compar'd with me thou ſhalt as innocent 
Appear, and did the ſtate but know how high 
The provocation 1s of my diſdain, 
It would with trembhng fear the confequence. 

Au. Who injur'd me the favor ſhall not have 
To die, unleſs that I accompanie 
That death with an eternal infamie. 

Ful. That merits not the title of revenge, 
When we deſtroy and enemie, and give | 
Leave to his reputation ſtill to hve. Exeunt, 


Valentin. Florus. Statilizs. Honorws, with Conrt-Attendants, 


Val. Since not as yet poſleſt of Rome, we cannot 

Expreſs our joy with uſual feſtivals, 
For this adoption of Florws in the Empire; 
Lets ſee what ſports, and what divertiſements 
Our Camp affords us in our ſlaves and captives. 

Here very conveniently may be brought in 

ſome OS of the Stage. 
Val. T never lik't the fancie of Argnſtus; 

Nor of ſome other Princes, who have from 
The vices, imperfettions of ſucceſſors 
(Sometimes their Sons, Brothers, neareſt Allies) 
Sought to illuſtrate to poſteritte 
Their ſhameful glory, ſo injurious to them, 
And to the prefent age : A ſohid virtue 
Needs no ſuch foyl, or ſhadow to ſet off 
Her beauteous taſtre z and this 1s the reaſon, 
Why I omitting my own iſſue joyn'd 
To me in bloud, not virtue, Flors, have 
Deſtin'd thee for my ſucceſlor 3 and to morrow 7 
oOm- 


T he Roman Empreſs. 


Companion, and Collegue in my great Empire. 
Sta. Your Majeſty declares in this Election, 
No paſſion has an influence o're your judgement. 

Lal. Since *'tis not in my power to create him 
Heir of my bloud, Fle make him of my glorie. 
But Florws why amaz'd ? thy merit ſhould 

Prevent thy marvel at thy high advancement : 
Honor ſhould ne'r ſurprize a noble breſt, 
But enter as a long expected ghelt. 
Flo. My filence was th' effect of grief, and wonder 
The laſt occaſion'd thus to ſee a Father 
Deveſt himſelf of natural affettions.,. 
To repreſent a Prince more abſolute : 
My ſorrow from the ſenſe of envy ſprings, 
Which will purſue fo great proſpenitie. 


3/ 


Val. Your grief were juſter, if your exploits had not 


Deſerved envy 3 and your wonder, 1 
Your merit had not forced this Election. 

Hor. He need not envie fear, who by his ations 
Worthy of envie has ſecur'd himſelf 
In a ſafe ſtation, above the reach of envie. 

Flo. Thetitle of Ceſarean Majeſtic 
Is too illuſtrious for my extraction, 
The charge too weighty for theſe ſhoulders 5 which 
T fear will faine under their glorious burden. 

Sta. Who firſt knows how to rule himſelf, like you, 
Seems deſtin'd by the providence of heavens 
For the ns of Scepters, and of Empires. - 

Val. Fear nothing Florws 3 chearfully ang 
This greatneſs, as thy valors recompence3 
A purchaſe, which with loſs of bloud, life, honor 
So often is ſought after by ambition : 
For the proud man finds that the boiſtrous floud, 
Which rowls him to this Port, ſtill runs in bloud. 


Exeunt. 


ACT. 


28 The Roman Empreſs. 


SS 3. IV. 
Valentius. Carbo. Antonia. 


Val. Ow I perceive, as thou haſt told me, that 
N This my erroneous purſuing of 
The cuſtoms of Princes my Anceſtors, 

(Which makes me as T writeand ſpeak with pens, 
And Tongues of other men; juſt ſo I hear 
My informations with the ears of others) 
Has led me in a labyrinth of errors, 
Where truth could never find me out, had you 
Not been her truſty guides. For th ou O-Carbo 
Muſt be content to have this noble Lady 
Companion inthy glory. Car. T am proud of it. 

Val. *T'was ſhe who firſt made known to me, from whence 
Aroſe the clouds, which have of late echpſt 
The mirth, and beautie of my deareſt Conſort : 
I ſay 'twasſhe; prepare thy faith to hear 
Far greater wonders, than thou haſt related. 
This Traytor Florys in the preſence of 
This noble Lady has ſolicited 
My Empreſs, O horror ! to betray 
My honor 3 nay ſtartle not 3 that's my part, 
Whom the world falſely calls the great Yalentizs. 

Car. I was ſurpriz'd; but thinking how the greateſt 
Of vices is ingratitude ; there's none 
OF which I think he cannot be found guilty. 

Val. This I confeſs : but alaſs ! here his utmoſt 
Cruelty ſhould have fpar'd his Prince : I am 
The ſoul diftaſ'd through the vaſt body of 
The Empire, thus expol['d in all parts to 
His wounds, and injuries 3 at leaſt herein 


He ſhould have had compaſſion of his friend 


His 


The Roman Empreſs. 


His Benefattor, Father by adoption 3 
Which merits more then if Ewere by nature. 

Car. Sir, he has told me, he eſteem'd all things 
Lawful to gain an Empire, or a Miſtreſs : 

And in a ſcorning manner oft would ſay 3 
In other things let juſtice be obferv'd. 

Val, O ye immortal Gods.! why has your care - 
Given us a touchſtone to diſtinguiſh our 
Adultcrate gold, and no mark to diſcern 
The treacherous hearts of falſe perfidious men. 

If this be true 3 | 
Confound him with your ſharpeſt thunderbolt : 
But 'tis too true 3 and if T further ſtay 
To queſtion it; I fear T ſhall become 
Procurour of thoſe dire events upon me, 
Portended in my laſt nights dreams to happen 
Within ſo ſhort a time. | 
Antonia retire : Tle have a care 
To vindicate my honor : his proud Laurels, 
Which from Joves thunder are ſecure, Fle blaſt. 
But let this ſecret make no further progreſs. 

Ant, My prudent care ſhall not fail to correct 
This fault, to which our ſex is incident. 

yal. A Prince, who tolerates a known diſgrace, 
Becomes the ſubject of the vulgar ſcorn. 

Ant. Honor, once ſought to be betray'd, is never 
Secure, ſo long as the Offendor lives. 

Val. Gelofie entred in a Prince, no other 
Aſliſtant needs, to haſten his revenge. 

Ant. Which, when it is of a ſlow pace, we find 
'Tis figne of weakneſs in a Princes mind. 

Ler him th' effe&ts Sir of your anger prove, 
Who thus hath undervalued your love 

In prudent Monarques, like your ſelf, t'appear 
Not to be fear'd, ſhould be your only fear. 

Car. You Majeſty's perplext. Yal. But why ſhould 1 
So low thoughts of my ſelfhave; and fo high 
Of his bold inſolent temerntie. 


39 


Exit. 


Good 


4.0 . The Roman Empreſs. 


Good Carbo have the patience to repeat 
Thy ſtory over 3 though in it ev'ry paſlage 
Creates new wounds, and ulcers in my ſoul. 
Thou ſaidſt, the Maſter of my light Cavalrie, 
Macrinus, was hot Father of thts Flor ; 
But that Arſenixs, the ſworn enemy of 
My perſon, and my dignitie has made 
The world the preſent of this diflembling Monſter : 
Can this be ſo? Car. Your Majeſtic may reſt 
Aſſur'd I heard. it from his own relation; 
And how beſides he has in a diſguiſe 
Converſt here with him in our Camp 3 where he 
Aſſur'd him of the conſent of Hoſtil;us 
For his obtaining of the fair Awrelia, 
The Tdol of his Cats 
With the rich dowrie of the Roman Empire. 

Val. Which his pernicious hopes ſecurely ſtreight 
Devour'd, with conſentment to myTuine. 

Car. Yes; and with invitation to my elf, 
Joyning with him, to take part with Hoſtilize. 
See where the Empreſs comes: I take my leave. 


Valentins. Fulvuia. Antonia. 


Ful. Now if,, Antonia, as thy promiſe was, 
Thou haſt diſtill'd the poiſon 1n his ears 3 
I ſhall perceive ſtreight by the operation. . . 
Val. My deareſt Fulvia, fince all griefs and ſorrows 
Divided are betwixt the Wife and Huſband, - 
Th occaſiens alſo ſhould be ſo; if then 
Antonia's care without your intimation 
Has let me know the cauſe of your diſtemper, 
T muſt obtain her pardon; let then thy 
Former ſerenity of looks diſpel 
Thoſe clouds of ſorrow from that brow to mine; 
Where they hang thick already 3. but Tle have 
Them waſht away im bloud. of the 'offendors. 


Ful. With whoſe let mine be joyn'd'; Sir 'tis the £21, 
. p, b A. ©) y 


Exit, 


a ſide. 


The Roman Empreſs 41 


Favor I beg here on my knees; by all Exeels, 
The former merits, with which the conſtant duty TES 
Of an obedient Wife has &'re been able | 
T'oblige a Huſband 3 by the riſing ho 
Of young Yalentivs 3 and the other Z = 
dell fruits of our ſo conſtant loves, till now 
By this accurſed accident diſturb'd. 
Val. They are not : riſethenz O letme not ſee fakes her wp. 
My idol thus bow, and encline to me. 
Ful. Sure you look on me with falſe eyes, or elſe 
You ſee me chang'd into a loathſome creature : 
Suſpicion of guilt-in an Empreſs makes her 
Seem foul, and guiltie to her felf and others. 
Sol am in effeCt : a Viper though 
He caſts no poiſon forth 3 his very touches 
Are venemous : th'offring to embrace me 
In Florus has methinks with leproſie 
Infected all my parts. Good Sir have mercic kneels again, 
On your poor Fxlvia here; and let me die 
When life is now my greateſt miſerie. 
Val. His bloud ſhall rather ſatisfie th' offence, 
Who treſpaſt on thy ſpotleſs innocence : 
And though he ſeemeth at too cheap a rate 
By ſingle death his crime to expiate 
'Tis recompenc't at once to ſee him die, 
And live in a perpetual infamie 
Whilſt thou the beſt of women 3 glorie of embraces her. 
The preſent age, and honor of thy ſex, 
Shalt like a ſtar of the firſt magnitude, 
Shine glorious in the firmament of honor. 
However yet, my deareſt Fulvia, 
The heavens in their happineſs delay : 
Thy preſence, though ſo much defired there, 
T' inſtruct the age is neceſlary here. 
Ful. My noble Lord, my dutie, 
So hitherto obſequious to your will, 
Shall ſtrive then to obey your laſt commands. 
Val. O now thou -eakſt like Fulvia, and thy ſelf : 
G Thy 


42 The Roman Empreſs, 

Fhy paſſions can never long transforme- thee: 

Come let us go to my Pavilion, and 

Conſult upon the manner, how to put 

In ſpeedy execution our revenge : 

The juſt effefts of which ſhall never ceaſe, 

Till in the Traitorsbloud I find my peace* Excunt.. 


Elorws.. Honorins. 


Flo. "Tis ſtrange methinks, Honorins, that you;. 
An Epicurean by Seft ſhould be _ 
An enemy of love 3 the greateſt pleaſure, 
When once obtain'd, in the enjoyment of 
What we call perfect beauty 3 a happineſs 
$0 frequently defir'd, fo ſeldons found. 
Hen. The nature of true pleaſure can't confilt 
In the delights of love, which leave the ſoul 
Not fſatisfi'd;, when the moſt ſatiated ; 
Whillt in her interchangeably there fight 
Reſtleſs diſguſt, and reſtlefs appetite. 
True pleaſures no remorle, but leave behind 
Them ſtill a grateful odor in the mind. 
Flo. They ill diſcourle of. love, who are no lovers. 
Hon. It troubles me to ſce the royal fort 
Of noble Flor#s heart thus yielded up; 
Flo. *Tis given up to him, who conquers all things 5 
And will in time the brave Hoxorizs brelt; 
Where virtue keeps ſo {trong a garrifon. 
Hor. It muſt be weak, if {> contemptible 
An Adverſary can his entrance: force. 
Flo. Neglect of the Enemy deſtroys the valiant: 
Hon. Tix fear of him dejeQeth noble ſpirits. 
Flo. Who apprehends his Adverſfary. may 
Preſerve his honor, thought he loſe the day. 
Hon. Eiteecm of him is diſtraſt in our. ſelves. 
Flo. A pradent tar companion is of yalor.. 
Hor. "Tis rather.of an wrelolved mind.. 


To 


The Roman Empreſs. 24. 
To them Aurelia. 


Flo. But ſtay,behold : here breaks the beauteous light, 
Which will theſe difficulties cleer. 

Honorixs ſtand firm 3 what means this change > Honorius ſ#r- 
Let not thy aftions contradit thy words. priz'd at her beanty. 

Hon, My hearts unmov'd : but the external ſenſe 
In ſuch ſurpriſals has no ſure defence. exit, 

Au. Yonder he comes his eyes are fixt on minez 
Thoſe falſe lights, which will lead him tohis ruine. 

Love and Diſdain, two raging firebrands, 

Are of the mind ; their common reſidence 

Is in the heart 3 but raiſe a general 

Diſturbance in the ſoul, confounding all | 

Her faculties. They are of equal force, | It 
Contending for the prize with emulation 3 2 
But in effei and nature contrary; 

The one producing hatred, and the other 

Gentle affeQtion : when theſe fierce Combatants 

In duel are; the heart too narrow a field 

For two ſuch Foes groans languiſhing in torment, 

Till one the victor ſhall ſubdue the other 3 

As here Diſdain has Love in me, by force 

Compelling me to att a damned part 

Againſt my nature, conſcience, and my heart. 

My honor does depend upon his death aſides 
And yet perchance my life dependson his. | ; 
But I am now —— paſt all retreat. 

Flo. O my Arrelia (pardon this preſumption) 

If T am bold to call you ſo upon 
So new acquaintance z my love's of longer date. 

An. And io is minez however that love's poor, 
Which time requires to grow up to perfection. 
Mine of another nature was 3 at once 
Finding conception, and maturity 3 


- Both at firſt fight of = Flo. But what was ſtrangers 


lamed from the ſhadow, 


I tound my heart en 
G 2 And. 


4 The Roman Empreſs. 
And pifture of yon only : from dead colours 
Love firſt found life in me : I felt the hear, 
Before I ſaw the light : wonder not then 

If T ſtand trembling in the preſence of 

My Goddeſs, when the luſtre of her only 
Image'I could not with theſe eyes ſuſtain 5 
Which from that time is ever in my thoughts. 

Au. Tis long, amongſt your very ehemies, 
That fame has painted your illuſtrious perſon, 
Heroique adions (though perchance with colours. 
Defethve from the life) and:your great merit: 
Wonder not then, that I forgetting my 
Imperial dignity, and virgin bluſhes 3 
And other ceremonious reſtraints, 

So ſuddenly am thus become your captive. 

Flo. Can this be true, Axrelia? can the heavens 
So prodigally pour on me their bleſlings, 

Ax. To ſee you; and to fall in love with you, 
Sir, things are different z but by thoſe heavens 
You mentioned, happened to me in one moment. 

Flo. Why ſhould we fear, that time ſhould then deſtroy, 
What time did not produce 3 that's our affeCtion. 

Ax. "Tis true 3 but violent flames, like-ours, we ſee 
Conſume their nouriſhing fuels, and themſelves 3 
And we think happier thoſe, whom love inſpires 
With moderate heats, with moderate deſires : 
Which keep themfelves alive hke glowing fires. 

Flo. My life, my ſoul, my dear Axrelia, 

Make here no mention of ſiniſter ſurmiſes. 

My breſt not comprehending well the greatneſs 

Of my felicitie, gives place too faſt 

Already to my fears, I cannot think 

My fortune unforeſeen will conſtant prove. 
Au. Sir you may fix her, if youl execute 


What the ſenſe of this Letter. will perſwade you. | 
Giues him a Letter, which. 


he. reads as follows. 


Flo.. 


T he Raman Empreſc. 45 


Flo. Florus, TI have, thraugh my affetion, to you, reftared to l;- 
berty your friend, and my priſoner of war Honorius 3 who has dif- 
cover d to me your ſecret lave of our Princeſs Aurelia 5 from whom 
T have obtain'd a correſpondent affeftion for you, by the conſent of 
her Father : who much deſires to adopt ſuch a Sau for his Succeſſor in 
the Empire." The afſe&ion, and intereſt you have in the Army, mi- 
niſters a fair occaſion of revenging your {Y of a cruel adverſary of 
your Father, by diſarming Valentius of his chiefeſs forces. Texped# 
your ſodain anſwer, and concurrence to your own happineſs. 


ih Arſenius.. 
What's this I ſee? new treacheries againſt me > 
This Letter is writ by Arſenize. 
How comes Awrelia to preſent it, who aide. 


Declares her ſelf enemy of Heſtjline. | 
Can ſhe diſlemble ? a pexſon of ſuch honor? 

An. What ſtrange ſuſpenſion is this whichT ſee, 
Sir, in your thoughts, and lagks ſuddenly chang'd ? 
Be reſolute 3 the queſtion's only here, 

Whether you will-concur 1n the procuring 
Your Father's happineſs, [your own, and mine. 

Flo. Tcan no amorous correſpondence purchaſe 
Atſucha rate, thus army my honor. 

ul 


Au. Sir 'twas plebeian fol of 
Which firſt raiſ'd Idols; and then worſhipt them 3; 
And amongſt others this of honor; but | 
T hope your thoughts fly higher, not confind 
Within the limits of law, cuſtom, juſtice 
Shackles for Common people, not for Princes 3 
Great Ravagers of ſea, and land like: you. 

Flo.. Unhappy Florus ! what a caleſtial ſhape: 

A Fury here hastaken x0 betray thee.. 

Vile woman take thy Letter 3 throws back the- 
Inveigle ſome leſs cautious with theſe arts. Letter.. 
Tloy'd thee, whil'ſt I thought thee lover of 

Fhy honor 3: but do now as much deteſt thee, 

As Ido thy moſt deteſtablecrime.. 


4.6 The Roman Empreſs. 


I could now kill thee 3 for though little honor half draws. 
VVould in't appear 5 theaftion commendable 
Would be to purge the world of ſo infeftious 

A Peſtilence : yet'hve ;thou wilt reſent puts up. 
Thus, I believe, the greaterpuniſhment. 

. Au. Anrelia 5 now'tis time to corhe toations 
Repentance 1s too'late + crifnes of this nature, 
It once begun, are ne'r ſecure till finiſht. 

Friends, Officers, Commanders, haſten
