Requested Title: ROMULUS AND HERSILLIA; or, The Sabine War
Authors: Lady Slingsby
Matched Anchor: ROMULUS AND HERSILIA; OR, THE SABINE WAR
TCP: A62347
EEBO: 11906830
Source Title: Romulus and Hersilia, or, The Sabine war a trage dy acted at the Dukes Theatre.
Source Author: Behn, Aphra, 1640-1689.
Source Date: 1683
Source URL: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/A62347/master/A62347.xml
Metadata Score: 0.980
Unit Score: 0.982

---

ROMULUS AND HERSILIA; OR, THE SABINE WAR
A TRAGEDY Acted at the Dukes THEATRE
LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible without Temple-Bar, and T. Benskin in St. Brides Church-yard, Fleet-street, 1683
PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. Butler
HOw we shall please ye now I cannot say;
But Sirs, 'Faith here is News from Rome to day;
Yet know withal, we've no such Packets here,
As you read once a Week from Monkey Care
But 'stead of that Lewd Stuff (that clogs the Nation)
Plain Love and Honour; (tho quite out of fashion;
Ours is a Virgin Rome, long, long, before
Pious Geneva Rhetorick call'd her Whore;
For be it known to their Eternal Shames,
Those Saints were always good at calling Names
Of Scarlet Whores let 'em their Wills devise,
But let 'em raise no other Scarlet lies;
Lies that advance the Good Old Cause, and bring
Into Contempt the Prelate with the KING
Of what will such vile Brutes be now affraid,
When Rats and Weazles gnaw the Lyon's Beard?
And then in Ignoramus Holes they think,
Like other Vermin, to lie close, and stink
What have ye got, ye Conscientious Knaves,
With all your Fancy'd Power, and Bully Braves?
With all your standing to't; your Zealous Furies;
Your Lawless Tongues, and Arbitrary Juries?
Your Burlesque Oaths, when one Green-Ribbon-Brother,
In Conscience will be Perjur'd for another?
Your Plots, Cabals; Your Threats, Association,
Ye shame, Ye very Nusance of the Nation,
What have ye got but one poor Word? Such Tools
Were Knaves before; to which you've added Fools
Now I dare swear, some of you Whigsters say,
Come on, now for a swinging Tory Play
But, Noble Whigs, pray let not those Fears start ye,
Nor fright hence any of the Sham Sheriffs Party;
For, if you'l take my censure of the story,
It is as harmless as e're came before ye,
And writ before the times of Whig and Tory
The PERSONS
Romulus, King of Rome
Hostilius, A Noble Roman his Friend
Spurius Tarpeius, Commander of a Fort in Rome
Tatius, General of the Sabines
Curtius, A Commander of Note in the Sabine Army
WOMEN
Hersilia, Daughter of Tatius, and Wife to Romulus,
Feliciana, Her Sister, young and Innocent,
Tarpeia, Daughter of Tarpeius, Sabine Ladies attending Hersilia. Portia, Cloe, Cornelia,
Sabine Ladies attending Hersilia
Portia,
Cloe,
Cornelia,
Souldiers, and Attendants
The Scene Rome
Romulus and Hersilia, OR THE Sabine War
ACT. I
SCENE I
Romulus, Hersilia, Hostilius, and Attendance
Rom
WHY weeps Hersilia? What malicious sor row envies the world the luster of those eyes, and draws a Cloud o're beauties rich est treasure? Has love appear'd injurious? Do you repent the blessings you have given your Romulus? And do I seem to you too, the hated Ravisher your severe Father makes me?
Hers
Pardon my dearest Lord, pardon these tears, tis the soft flame of love, here at my heart, makes these warm drops distil lt is for you! Had I less value for my Romulus, I had not known these sorrows. Witness you Heavens! I wish I had a voice might reach the ear of every Roman, every Sabine, nay through all Italy, while thus I vindicate my Romulus from any force on, me, but that of love. You Gods! was this a Rape! no it was all consent; and all mutual design. But what is love? what's Truth? what's Justice? when my Flint-hearted Father calls it a Rape, and vows revenge?
Rom
And is this all, my Love, are these the fears that cause the precious shower? If this be all, stay those dear streams, whose e very drop's a pearl of value to redeem a Captive King. I Honour Tatius as Hersilia's Father; but if he brings us War, and as a Foe ap proaches Rome, swelling with empty threats, I'll tell him, in the language of my Father Mars, I slight his anger, smile at his Re venge
Hers
But I must be unhappy; whoever wins, you must lose sufficiently: Whether my Father or my Husband bleeds, still I am wounded, good Heavens! why have you made the sweets of love ever to be allay'd with so much bitterness?
Rom
You kill me with your tears: My love, my love, wou'd you have me weep too? Forbear, or I shall lose my Manhood, while all that's Roman in me melts away to see you thus desolved in sorrows; what wou'd you have me do? Sweetest of all thy Sex, at your Command I'll fall at Tatius feet, and bid him cut my head off, because I love his Daughter more then ten thousand lives
Hers
Forbid it all you Gods; no, live my Lord, live to defend Hersilia, your Hersilia, from a cruel Father, who wou'd not let her live, that is, not love her Romulus: Live to defend that Romulus, Hersilia's better self, from an unjust invader: Methinks I feel inspired a courage truly brave and truly Roman; let the malicious world assault me with all its fury, while I am thus inthron'd in your dear Armes, I am secure of Fortune
Rom
Ay! now I'm blest; now, now I Reign indeed, now at this omen, I see my Infant Rome lift her aspiring head above the Nations, while all the Ocean and the remotest Isles dance at her smiles, and tremble at her frowns. O thou brighter Venus, thou more Majestick Iuno, can you say this to me and not transfer at the same time the whole worlds Empire hither? Hostilius! Friend! why are you silent? speak my best Friend, am I not truly great, can there be greater?
Host
(aside) Oh tormenting Question! How shall I answer this and not discover a base unfriendly envy? Away degenerate Pas sion, I'll tear thee from my long abused heart, or tear that heart out
(aside)
Rom
What means this silence? Does ill fate appear, in all its various forms of sorrow to me? Here drown'd in tears, and there in silent groans. She cannot sure keep long from me, since she has made so near approaches. You two divide my Soul: The best of Women, and the worthiest Friend; and do you strive whose grief shall most afflict me?
Host
Forgive me, Sir, or rather pitty me, tis I am only wretched amidst this common Joy, opprest with an ill timed and causeless Melancholly. 'Tis a disease I know; let it not be infectious, why should you be concern'd to hear me sigh. Are not you blest in your Hersilias love; you are an Emperour, a God in that, and you deserve it which of all the immortal beings woud not change Hea vens with Romulus? Woud you contemplate the Celestial Glories? You have 'em here. Wou'd you see brighter Stars than those above? behold 'em in these eyes. Woud you have Musick far be yond that of the higher Orbs? Hersilias voice shall give it. Woud you be immortal and taste Ambrosia? You have it in these Lips
The dyet of the Gods is pall'd and course to that,
But I'm a Devil, damn'd to dispair and silence
[Aside
Rom
Can I be happy, and Hostilius wear a Mourning look? My Joys should be all yours, or mine your sorrows, if I'm thus highly blest, (and sure I am) pertake of all my Fortune. Com mand, Rule, Reign, over my Rome and me. Have I a City, Sub jects, Crown, and my Friend not the same? Is not Hostilius Ro mulus, and Romulus Hostilius? Take and enjoy then all that makes me happy, but leave your mournful silence
Host
(Aside) Oh Royal bounty! oh unheedful kindness, he knows not what he sayes, nor I to answer to this invidious Friendship
(Aside)
Enter Feliciana
Feli
Oh Sister, O dear Hersilia, what will become of us
Hers
Why Sister, what surprizing fright has caus'd this Questi on?
Feli
The City's all allarm'd: While from the Tarrace yonder, I saw the distant-hills towards the west-gate covered with Arm ed Sabines drawing this way: I hear they come to have us back, alive or dead; are these the effects of your Heroick Passions! in deed Hersilia, tho I respect you dearly, you had not had my Company, if I had thought I shoud have dyed for Love
Rom
Innocently pretty! fear not, Feliciana, these are but shews of terrour, there's nothings real in 'em. Come Hostilius, let us go view the Enemy, and give such orders as may secure the Ladies fears, and make the Sabines know, Romans and Lovers are not to be Conquered
[ Exeunt Rom. Host
Feli
Sister, how great a change do we find here from the still life we 'mongst the Sabines led, while at our Fathers Silvan Pal lace, there, frighter from love, and seldome seen of Men, we spent so many dayes in the adjoyning Groves, that all the wild Inhabi tants knew us as part of them, the Thorstle, Nightingale, and little Redbrest, with all the other pretty feather'd Quire, at our ap proach wou'd flock about, and fill the Air with a compleat and chearful consort: The speckled Dear woud fearless bring their Fawns, and seek their food from me
Hers
True Feliciana, those were our softer hours
Thoughtless in that calm state we past the year,
And knew not what it was to love or fear
But now I have learnt both; since the brave Romulus first met me in those shades: (Ah fatal hour, yet hour I still must love) we often met, and full of angry tears at the approaching night as often parted. You know Feliciana, how we dispairing ever to procure the severe Tatius to approve our love, the gene rous Youth of Rome, by my consent, forc'd us, and all our Train of Sabine Ladies, from the great feast and Sacred Rights of Consus
Feli
I know too much: Woud I had never known more then the harmless joyes of our own dwelling. Widdow'd for loss of me; how will the Turtles grieve, which I so often fed, and kist in feeding? Were they now here, methinks, I could instruct 'em to sigh, and Coo, and mourn, with better Emphesis, then their own feather'd Parents in a Grove of Cypress
[Weeps
Hers
Alas my pretty Sister, weep not however. If the sweet toiles of Lovers are uneasie to you, you may return. Command a Chariot and a Convoy when you please; why shoud I force my Sister to pertake my troubles
Feli
Sure Hersilia cannot have so mean a thought of me, to think I'de leave her, no I'le die here: Yet wear you not my Sister, I coud not go from Rome. I know not what it is, but something here, about my heart, afflicts me, and often pants, and heaves, and almost stops my breath; and will not suffer me so much as wish to be again amongst the Sabines and my once loved pleasure: Of late I alwayes weep and sigh when private, yet know not why: I seek to be alone, hate Company, yet know not well the cause of this uneasie humour
Hers
Why these are all the innocent signs of stifled Love
Feli
(sighing) Indeed it may be so: Had it been any thing but that, I might perhaps have known the cause, and sought a cure; but love's so great a stranger, I can't: So much as guess at his proceedings
(sighing)
Her
How long have you been thus?
Fel
E're since the willing force that brought us hither. I need not tell you (for you well remember) how at those publick Shews where we were taken, Prisoners of Love, when at the signal given Your Romulus seiz'd you, and every Roman youth, that Lady whom his choice or chance presented: Hostilius, for my quality no doubt, as being your Sister, not for my person, made me his care, and enter tained me then with so much gallantry, and such obliging kindness, that I have never since had any ease but when I see him, yet I had ra ther die than he should know it
Hers
Fear not dying my Felciana, I know Hostilius, by his silent sighs, melts with loves kindly flames as much as you
Fel
That, that's my torment—: for silly as I am, I see he loves, but see withal, I'am not the Object. Since that dear time of our first encounter, he never treated me with one kind word; But where soever I'm present, he looks another way, and sighs, and never speaks to me
Hers
Pretty Feliciana weep no more; but trust your Cares to me, I will find out a Cure, for this sweet innocent Passion. Mean time, let's seek my Romulus: I have not patience to endure his ab sence: I know his friend is with him too: Come Sister, you shall see Hostilius
Fel
O hold, I dare not Sister: Since I have told you all my weakness for Hostilius, I am ashamed to let you see me see him
Hers
Away you foolish Innocent, remove
Such idle scruples, or ne're thrive in Love
[Exeunt
ACT. I. SCENE II
Enter Romulus, Hostilius, Spurius Tarpeius
Rom
THE Western Gate that fronts the Enemy, with the adjoyning Fort, Tarpeius, I commit to your experi enc'd Loyalty and Conduct
Sp. Tar
It is an honour Sir, which when I give you cause to wish undone, take off my head
Rom
Hostilius, to you belongs all the Command I have my self in my own City
Hostil
Why shou'd you be so prodigal of favours! Why shou'd you lavish thus, my best of friends, what Heaven and your own me rits have conspired to make you only worthy of! On me, on me too: One that can taste no happiness, one whose dull sence has lost all relish of a blessing, one born to be a wretch, a curst unhappy wretch!
Rom
This is extravagancy, sure friend you are not well
Hostil
My tongue too much betrays me, woud I coud spit it out —I must confess, great Sir, my mind of late is much distempered: Which often makes my language out of order. It is a causless tran siant Cloud, I know, and soon will over. I beg you take no notice of it. I am too sensible of my own imperfection, and am ashamed to have it known to others
Rom
'Tis reason nobly urged, I'm silent—but see Hersilia. —
Enter Hersilia, Feliciana, Tarpeia, and c
Rom
Be safe my Love as your own wish can fancy: Nor let the pretty Feliciana fear, since Rome is now so guarded, that the Sabines may as well hope to storm the Cloud as prevail here: No arms but those of friendship can pass these Walls
Her
I think, my Lord your cause will raise an Army even of Wo men. Tarpeia talks so bravely here, and in such Martial Language, that were we all like her we alone were sufficient, not only to defend our selves, but to subdue all the adjacent Enemies of Rome
Rom
Your Conquest, sweet Hersilia, have been already greater: And for the fair Tarpeia since she appears so brave, she too shall have a share in our Command— Tarpeius, let your Daughter act as Leiute nant in your absence: This is the Ladies War, and why should then that Sex be bar'd to share the honours of it?
Enter a Souldier
Sol
Sabinus Curtius Sir, sent from the Enemy, attends without
Rom
Admit him
Fel
Now Sister should this War, scarce yet begun, end in a treaty?
Hers
As I'm a Sabine by my Birth, I wish a Peace with honour, but I am more a Roman by my inclination than to desire it basely
Enter Curtius
Cur
Tatius the just, to the great Romulus, hath sent these terms of Peace—
Host
He speaks as if we were already Conquered!
Rom
Suffer him, good Hostilius. —Go on Sir
Cur
He sayes the Sabines never yet loved war meerly for the inhumane act of killing. Tis your own selves then that destroy your selves, if you refuse him Justice; he offers therefore, e're yet the Sword has been unkind to Roman Mothers, e're widdowed Matrons, with hands up heav'd to Heaven, name you, and curse the cause that rob'd them of their Husbands, e're Orphan Babes, like Callow Birds, the old one killed abroad, dye mourning for their food; 'ere these and thousand worse events of war arrive, he of fers to withdraw his arms, if you restore Hersilia and the other Ladies
Host
Restore Hersilia?
Cur
Who 'gainst the Law of Nations, 'gainst all the rights of Civil life, you first invited to your publick Entertainments, and then from thence so fouly ravisht. Our General farther sayes, if after this your merits can prevail with their respective Parents, to gain 'em for your Wives, you shall have liberty to use such formal means in your address, as peace and Love, not brutal force al low of
Rom
Tell the most Noble Tatius, he is now our Father-in-law, and we as such shall treat him; how e're his, passion bids him act with us. Hersilia 's not ashamed to call her Romulus Husband; and can her Romulus fear to call her Wife, and as such keep her here? No, shou'd he bring a greater force than that which made the ten years Seige at Troy, here she shoud live and Reign, secure, and better guarded then their Palladium: And for the other Ladies, (in all but thirty, and most Attendants to Hersilia ) they have all found by their own free Election, Husbands or humble Lovers of the best of Rome; I cannot force the property of others, nor can I in civility bid 'em remove, where their own choice and love has made 'em settle; besides it were impertinent and base for us to quit the love which they themselves have given, and make a new Court o're again to their old Parents; as for the foul act which you charge me with, and call a Rape, Hersilia's self, whose every sillable's a sacred truth, can purge that scandal
Hers
Yes; Heaven and I can Witness, so can Feliciana, that 'twas no force but a confederate plot 'twixt my lov'd Lord and me I knew too well how little kind my Father was to all the Romans, how vile ly he has spoke of their original, and the Asylum, with reason therefore my Lord and I despair'd of his assent, and us'd this means to Crown our loves: Are your demands then just or Honourable that seek to make a Husband quit his Wife?
Host
Restore Hersilia? Did he not say e're while restore Her silia? No, I will first my self fight your whole Army, take all the wounds ten thousand swords can give me, challenge every weapon in all your Camp to do its office here, Cut, Gash, and mangle every part about me, till there's not left one place to make a wound on, and I at last drown in a Sea of my own blood, e're you shall have Hersilia
Feli
(aside) Sure he mistakes the name, he shoud have said Feliciana; my love woud have it so. How happy had I been, if this concern, this high excess of favour had appeared for me, but now how wretched; O I shall faint, conduct me, sweet Cornelia, to my Chamber
(aside)
[Exit
Rom
Your friendship, dear Hostilius, carries you beyond your temper; my cause too far transports you
Cur
If these be your resolves, I have command to tell you, War must force the right which you deny us
Rom
If we must fight, where we had rather Love, and use those arms to kill which should embrace, know Curtius we are ready either way: Nor let your Sabines think to find our courage less than our love successful. We know the way to make your Men as well as Women Captive. Tarpeius see him safe without the walls: Farewel Sir
Host
Since you demand to have Hersilia back, I am no Man of words, I cannot argue whether the thing be just which you demand, but if you are brave meet me in the next skirmish, and then like Men and Soulders we'l dispute it. This if you dare.—
Cur
I smile at these last words; I dare do more than I dare speak, I am a Coward in my boasting. I long to meet you, Sir, till then I am your Servant
[ Exit Cur. and Tarpeius
Tarp
Gallantly answered, and with temper; me thinks I love him for't, I wish I were a Sabine Maid, or he a Roman
Aside
Rom
Come my Hersilia, while we have you, we cannot doubt the fate of Rome; Fortune and Victory must act for us, having so dear a pledge: The love inspired
By you, a stronger power and more assistance brings
To our Triumphant cause, than all the aid,
I justly may expect from Mars my Father
Then how successless must the Sabines prove
Opposing both the Gods of War, and Love
[Ex. all but Hostilius
Host
But more successless I, who fight against
Two such almighty passions as Love and Friendship
Ye Gods! What have I done to merit such a torment?
While these two Heavenly flames strive in my breast,
'Tis hell to me: I'am damn'd in the contest
But why shou'd I look on, as unconcern'd
While Civil War within me rends me peice-meal;
No, I will be a Monarch o're my self,
And crush the Rebels. Away thou soft seducer Love,
Tyrant and Traytor; I am a Roman,
And will keep my Friendship sacred
Who can offend in thought, so sweet a Friend
As is the Mighty Romulus? How blind is real kindness,
He cou'd not see my Passion for Hersilia,
When my love raved but thought it his concern
O innocent obliging Goodness! I wish
The Sword of Curtius, when we shall meet,
May find a way to revenge Romulus,
And peircing this offending bosome, end
Those thoughts that dared to injure such a friend
[Exit
ACT. II
Scena Prima
A Field before the Walls of Rome. Drums and Trumpets
Enter Curtius and other Sabines
Cur
I Would not have this skirmish grow into a Battle,
Ho, Lausus,
Bid those Rutilian succours halt till further Orders
1. Sab
The Romans, Sir, draw from their works apace ▪
Cur
No matter, I know they are too brave
To use their odds,—
O are you come Sir
Enter Hostilius and other Romans
Host
(To his party) Stand here; approach no nearer
(To his party)
As you respect your lives
Cur
(To his) Withdraw to the same distance,
(To his)
And leave me single to my Generous Enemy
Host
Curtius, I see you are Noble and dare be brave;
I ought in Justice then to ask your Pardon,
That I e're questioned it: they were rash words,
And I repent 'em
Cur
Spare your Apologies. First try what truth
Is in the appearance. If I indeed have Courage,
You may have cause enough, Sir, to repent,
But if you find me shrink chastize me for it
Host
The same for me—Come, Sir, this is for Romulus
The best of Men, and sweet Hersilia's cause
[They fight, and pause
Cur
Sure Hostilius, you but dally, and hardly think me
Such an Enemy as may deserve you utmost force
Know then if you are Romulus Champion,
I am his secret Rival. I love Hersilia,
Tho she her self yet never knew it,
And with so strong a Passion,
That were not Tatius for this war; should he
Forget his Daughter, yet I my self
Would raise an Army to redeem my Mistress,
This sure will make you fight in earnest
Host
Unhappily discovered! O, I am wounded
In the most tender part about me; thou hast
Unkindly rob'd me of my Honour;
That which I late design'd my dear Friends quarrel
Is now my own; my boasted Friendship, spight
Of all my reason, basely yeilds to love,
The near extinguished flame rages again,
Now I have found a Rival. Hold Curtius;
Let me reward your secret with a another,
That's yet unknown to all the world;
I love Hersilia, (I wish I cou'd not say)
Equal to Romulus; and if my flame
So hardly yeild to what I owe to him,
The Good, the Great, the God-born Romulus,
How can I hear thy Claim? Have at thy heart
Cur
Guard well thy own, Hostilius, my heart can know
No wounds; but what Hersilia gave,
[Fight, both Wounded
Cur
How just and how invincible so e're,
You think your cause, I see, 'twill not protect you
You are not invulnerable. You can bleed,
As well as I
Host
It is my glory, Curtius!
I never loved my blood till now, that it appears
So ready to be spent in her dear cause
For whom I have it. Flow, flow for ever
You immortal Fountains; the streams you see, O Sabine,
Are not the Ebbs of life but springs of love
Cur
That shall be thus determined:—
[Fight
1. Sab
Should we stand here and see the noble Curtius
Fight to death?
2. Sab
It is not reason, His life's not all his own but partly ours
1. Rom
See, yonder Sabines move to assist their Leader
We must not see the brave Hostilius fall opprest by number
[The Soldiers draw to their Principals, and all engage
Enter Romulus
Rom
My Friend engaged and wounded; it was a lucky
Chance that brought me to this quarter
[He engages; the Sabines beaten off
Host
Ill timed assistance! had not he appear'd
Either I might have kill'd or dyed;
Fortune I cannot thank thee for this kindness
[Aside
Rom
Still brave and still in noble danger, why
Are you so covetous of Honour, Friend,
As thus to steal it from your Romulus,
And not acquaint me with the envy'd purchase?
Why that emphatick sigh? I know 'tis not your wounds
Host
A wound how deep soever, was never worth it
But these are slight
Rom
Slight as they are, I'le urge the cause no further
Till I have seen 'em drest,—
Host
I'de rather make 'em wider; why do we not
Pursue the Enemy? Let me but once again
Engage with Curtius, and I will never ask
Another favour
Rom
You shall not go—
[Holds him
I never us'd my power upon my friend till now
Indeed you shall not go
Host
Under how greivous a restraint am I,
Who can with pleasure neither live nor dye?
[Exeunt
SCENE II. The Pallace
Enter Tarpeia, Portia
Port
WHat a sad sight Tarpeia have we had
From yonder Tarrace? The memory still afflicts me
Methinks it is a most undecent thing,
To see brave men, whom nature sure ordain'd
For better ends, and more to her advantage,
Like Tygers fight and wory one another
Tarp
You tremble Portia, that which chills your blood
Has heated mine to noble Emulation,
Had I been man I had not stood with you,
Idle spectator of the brave engagement
But run among 'em, wild, to the thickest action
Port
Sure you but jest, can any woman have
Thoughts so extravagant—
Tarp
Nature as wrong'd me when she made me Woman
Or else when I was form'd, she heedless and hastily,
Snatch't the next Soul for me, and left my Sex Imperfect
Port
Love is our Province, Women know no Wars,
But of the passions: Hope, Fear, soft desires,
Sorrows and suddain joys, make all our Battels
Happy are you Tarpeia, since your heart,
Thus arm'd, seems proof against that passion
Which kills, and even damns so many of us
Tarp
Wou'd it were so, my Portia, as you fancy.—
But waveing this, I prithee tell me freely,
Which you esteem the most deserving Men,
Our Romans or your Sabines?
Port
Ay this I like indeed, I'de rather talk
Of gallant Men, than see 'em fight and kill.—
By Iuno, then Tarpeia, I esteem
Your Roman Meen; it speaks a Soul more great,
A finer shape, a face more pleas'd, a look
More amorous than ours
Tarp
Come, this is all but Complement to me
Methinks your Sabines much excel our Men,
Solid, Majestical, of such a look
As speaks 'em truly just, and even tempered,
More noble than to give a wrong, but when
Received, duly requiting
Port
Call 'em severe, Tarpeiu, and revengeful
O did you know how strict they guard their Women,
Seldome or never seen abroad, but at
A Sacrifice or publick Rites to Heaven
Thus Tatius kept his Daughters, a Man so just
He knows no mercy.—
Tarp
—But what of Curtius, prithee?
Port
You have named the only he of all our Nation,
Thats like a Man indeed, such as I'de have him
Young, Courtly, Brave, well made, and Noble born,
Mighty obliging, and of as mighty Courage
Tarp
She reads my closer thoughts, before she spake
My Soul had fram'd this Character of Curtius
[aside
Port
But for that one we have a world of others,
Who though indu'd with vertue upon vertue,
Are yet of such a sullen gravity,
And so morosely wise you'd think 'em out
Of humour with the world, yet more contented
In a small House and Garden, than Kings in Courts
Tarp
But Curtius —
Port
Seems more a Roman, than a Sabine; he
Scorns the low thoughts of dull Philosophy;
And since the Gods gave him a Princes Soul,
He overlooks the fate of a Plebeian, —
Rome, Rome must Rule the World! it can't be otherwise,
Since she alone can shew a thousand such
I fancy Romulus. —
Tarp
More, more, of Curtius: I love to hear thee speak;
You paint so prittily the Man your favour
Port
I favour him, Tarpeia? alas that needs not;
He little values any of our favours
For he had never any Mistress yet;
(At least, that we can guess) that's his chief fault
Tarp
I like this best of all; I have no Rival
[aside
Enter Cornelia, Singing
Vse your Youth, use your Youth and happy hours,
while they remain
Cheerfully, Cheerfully, while they are ours,
the blessings entertain,
For time once lost can ne're be found again
For time once, and c
Tarp
See Portia, see, how unconcern'd she seems,
Careless of fate while the alarms of war,
Or feircer love, disquiet all her Sex
Have you no heart Cornelia?
Cor
Not to admit of love, or fear, Tarpeia
The Boy-God never dar'd to wound my breast
And if I'me arm'd against a God, why should
I fear a Souldier,— Portia the Queen asks for you
Port
Then we must part: Farewel Tarpeia
[ Ex. Port. Cor
Tarp
Farewell; farewel Conelia, ah happy Girl,
In her own Childish innocence secure;
She never dreams the smart which I endure
[Exit
SCENE. III
Romulus, Hostilius
Rom
HOW long, Hostilius, must I sue in vain,
To know the cause why I am thus afflicted,
That is, why you are thus afflicted? Cou'd I
Have kept a secret from my Friend so long?
Cou'd I have let him beg so long for that
Which should be his without so much as asking?
(For every Friend, or is, or ought to be
A confident) nor shou'd I care to know it,
But only in design to ease your sorrow;
Had you a secret cause of joy, I shou'd
Not then have importuned you for it
Why stand you thus, silent, and almost senseless,
As you wou'd say, I cannot answer what
You urge, and will not what you ask?
Host
O worthyest of Mankind! O Prince too good
To be my Friend! I wou'd not have you love,
But pitty me, and let me still be silent
Rom
I cannot, must not, dare not, suffer it,
Good Hostilius. —
Host
Then you will not pitty me,
I see I must appear foul and unworthy
In denying, or still more foul and more
Unworthy in Confessing. O mistaken goodness!
When you shall see my Soul naked and bare,
Of all its silent vernish, when you have stript
Off the disguise, you'l find so base an object,
So poor and so degenerate a Roman
And such a Monster of abused Friendship,
You'l start at the discovery, and curse me for it
Rom
Who but Hostilius, durst have said this of Hostilius?
Or do you aime th' unworthy Character,
At some less dear and less deserving Roman?
Host
I do not know another Roman that deserves it
No Sir, tis I: I am the unworthy owner
Rom
Come all this is false, and feign'd to put me off
I see through your pretences, if will not do
Hostilius; and I must know your discontent
Host
Suppose then—
(For such a Crime, from one oblig'd like me
Ought not to be discover'd but by supposition)
Suppose I had agreed with Tatius,
To give the City up, betray the Army,
And make my Friend his Prisoner—
Rom
I could forgive it
Host
Suppose I had designed, prompted by my Ambition,
To stab my Friend basely, and when ungarded,
Usurp his Crown, and make my self the head of Rome —
Rom
Tis all impossible, but still I should forgive it
Host
Higher yet: Suppose I love Hersilia,
Your, your Hersilia, love her to enjoy her,
For that dear end, suppose I'de be a Traytor,
A Devil; repine and covet those sweet joyes,
Which only you can merit, envy all
The Heaven which you possess in her embraces
How say you now? Now am not I a Villian?
Rom
No, but a foul desembler of a foul, false scandal,
Do not I know Hostilius? I'me sure he cannot
Think a Crime like these; I know he cannot,
Since my Remus dyed,
I never had so near a Friend; Remus and I,
Were not such Twins in blood, as we two in
Affection. Are not we Aeneas and Achates?
Host
Tis true, I know you are God born like him,
As good, as great a friend as he; you are
The more Divine Aeneas: But where is now,
Faithful Achates? O I am not worthy
I must confess all that I said was false,
But that which most concern'd you; I love Hersilia
Aye, there it is, that strikes the very root
Of friendship; now I'me sure you can't forgive me,
Nor is it fit you should, I can't forgive my self
As good and God like as you are you shou'd
Not stand unmov'd thus, like a Temple Idol;
But draw and sheath your Sword here in this breast,
That dar'd to harbour such injurious passion
Come, Sir, you see how wide my bosome opens
To receive your Justice; I'le meet your Sword,
And pull it home with my own hands,—
Are you still motionless? I shall not think
You love Hersilia as you ought, unless
You kill me
Rom
A Friend, who can confess offending thoughts
And, like you, hate 'em, e're they grow to action,
Pleading against himself, with so much Rigour,
Is still a friend. Our inclinations
Are not at our Election; but he, that can
Like you govern his rebel thought by the
Strict rules of Justice and true reason,
Ought to be lov'd, and honoured as a King
Be reconciled Hostilius to your self,
For you are still as dear to me as ever
Hostilius's Honour and Hersilia's Vertue,
Admit no Jealous scruples
Host
Is this your Sentence on Hersilia's Lover!
Do you thus treat a Rival? unheard of friendship!
Mark then what I decree with better Justice,
For my own Penance. Since you now have known
How false my passions are, how strong that love
That ought not to be nam'd; to free you of suspicion
I'le leave your Rome, for voluntary Exile,
And never see again my Romulus, nor his Hersilia
Rom
Must I be punisht then, because you say
You have offended; must I lose so dear
A Friend, because that Friend thinks he had wronged me?
We will not part, I'le lose an eye before
Hostilius; no, I will hazard all the ills
His love can do me
Host
Will you out-rival me in Honour too?
Will you not let me have that Mistress free?
O, you are cruel;—
If you were kind you would not keep me here,
Ever in sight of Heaven, yet in a state
Of such Damnation, I cannot hope
(Nor ought I ) to enjoy it
Rom
I'le woe Hersilia to smile upon you;
I know she will for my sake,—
Host
I dare not trust my self before her smiles,
They will unhinge my vertue, besides
A smile, tho much above my merit, yet to
A love like mine, gives little satisfaction,—
And yet she ought not to give more,—and yet,—
O I am wild, the more I think of this
The more I am confounded. Thus low I beg
[Kneels
You'd let me leave you. By all the tyes
Of friendship; by all the love you owe
Hersilia, allow my absence; for only that
Can cure my phrenzy
Rom
To beg with such concern is to command,
Where the request is to a love like mine
If you will go Hostilius, you have your liberty;
But let this dear embrace, and this, convince you,
That when we separate, you carry with you
The better half of your lov'd Romulus
Host
Witness, sweet Heavens, with what constraint I leave him!
No cause but one cou'd make so sad divorce
To be a Friend, I leave my Friend for ever
I'le now to unfrequented Woods, and seek
To lose Mankind; for after Romulus,
Who wou'd know other Men? and who wou'd see
A Woman that hath once known Hersilia?
Farewel thou God of Friendship; once more Farewel
[Embrace
I go imperfect, You keep back my heart
With such a groan the Soul and body part
[Exit
Rom
He's gone
O sacred power of Love! was e're affection
Like this of his? to quit his Mistress, for his Friend,
Nay more, to quit both Friend and Mistress rather
Than injure me? O truly Noble Roman!
Who can his passion in due terms express?
Had he not loved amiss, his love were less
Enter Hersilia and Feliciana, Attendants
Feli
Why did you bring me hither Sister? Here's no Hostilius
Hers
Wou'd you have dyed in silence! Shou'd I let you
Weep by your self, till I had lost my Sister,
And in a Fountain full of Maiden tears
Found all the poor remains of my Feliciana
You must not grieve so much, indeed you shall not
Do not I stand engaged to make you happy?
Feli
Softly, for Heavens sake: Your Lover's there,
I would not he shou'd hear you for the world
Rom
My dear Hersilia! O my only comfort,
I have a Pitious tale to tell my Love,
Hostilius my best friend, is now my Rival
Hers
Hostilius?
Rom
Yet so admir'd a Friend he still remains,
That to secure my love, and ease his own,
He hath forsaken Rome, and given himself
To a perpetual Exile.—
Feli
(aside) Heart hold a little: Life do not yet forsake me
(aside)
The other killing word, and then farewel
Rom
I'le borrow a few minutes of my Love
To view the works, and give abroad new orders,
And then you shall have all the wondrous story
[Exit
Hers
Feliciana! Sister! do but here me,
O she faints—
[ Feliciana faints back into one of her Womens Armes
Cornelia, Portia, Cloe,
Give all you help here quickly: O she's gone!
The fatal news was too too rough, her ear
Too tender to endure it: Bend, Bend her forward;
Give her more air: kind Heavens she comes again
Feli
O too unkind, O cruel Romulus,
Was it not death enough for him to tell me
Hostilius loves my Sister—
But he must kill me o're again and say,
He's gone for ever? Why do you thus torment me?
Why do you shew me Rome again, and not
Hostilius in it? But I will follow him
If he be yet in this vexatious world,
I'le find my Love, or lose my self in searching,
If to the world below he be retir'd,
I shall be there almost as soon as he;
The way is easie thither, and I can't miss it
Hers
Conduct her gently to repose Cornelia
What a surprizing turn was this? Poor Sister?
I have engaged beyond performance for her
Ye Gods, that favour innocence, be kind;
Keep her wits safe, and cure her troubled mind
[Exeunt
ACT. III
SCENE I
Scene, the Sabine Camp
Enter Tarpeia in Mans Apparel
Tarp
FOrgive me Maiden shame, that in this Habit
I seek to ease a Passion, for whose sake
The Gods have taken, more undecent formes
Yet still I am resolv'd to keep my Honour
Safe and entire, I would but see him once
Again, and then farewell the thought for ever
Enter a Centry
Cent
Stand and reveal your self; who are you there?
From whence, and whither going?
Tarp
I come from Rome, my business to Lord Curtius
If you can bring me Soldier to his presence,
Take this and this for expedition
Cent
Gold as I live; if that be all, Sir, follow me
[Exeunt
Enter Curtius
Cur
Hard fate of Lovers! The wounds that I receiv'd
From that Hostilius, far less afflict me
Than to discover that he is my Rival;
In vain, I fear, have I procur'd this War
Of Tatius, in vain, did I exasperate
The good old Prince against his Daughters Lover,
And vilified the Noble Romulus,
If thus the Roman Hydra, Love, produces
New heads to be cut off before we Conquer
Think Curtius, think in time, not only how
To gain Hersilia, but to save thy Honour
Enter Soldier
Sold
A Youth attends without from Rome, he sayes
He has affairs to you, and prays admittance
Cur
Let him Enter, and do you withdraw
[Exit Sol
Enter Tarpeia
Tarp
Would I were off again; now I should speak,
Heavens! how I am confounded?
[Aside
Cur
Would you with me, young Roman?
Tarp
I am imploy'd Sir, from the Sabine Ladies,
Now Roman Wives, Hersilia and—
Cur
Oh speak that Name again, sweet youth, and win
My Soul for ever! Is this Hersilia's message,
And to me?—There's Musick in thy voice
Tarp
(aside) What means this transport? The happy lye, it seems,
(aside)
Is well accepted.— Hersilia, Sir, and all
Your other Sabine Beauties now in Rome,
Have bid me tell you, and by you, Tatius;
Since the kind ties of Love are stricter far
Than those of blood, they cannot leave their Husbands;
Nor will they ever think of coming back
If by your Armes (which yet they cannot fear)
You conquer Rome, and make 'em yours again,
You'l force their wills, and do a fouler Rape,
Than that which brought 'em thither
Cur
Unkind!—thou art a cunning and dissembling Boy;
Fie on such early falshood. Wou'd any one
But such a smoothdeceitful thing as you,
Have rais'd my hopes, to glorious Expectations,
And so soon dash 'em all again to nothing?
Away then Syren -Traytor;
Tarp
Would I had never seen him,
O I love him more than ever:—
[Aside
Cur
And is this all you have in charge?
Tarp
No my Lord, I bring you news of Love
Cur
The Villain mocks me!
Tarp
By all the Gods—kill me if I dissemble—
Cur
O Venus, shou'd this be from dear Hersilia!
Love find your eyes again, but this short minute
And be hereafter blind for ever, (aside.) —Tell me
(aside.)
Thou Charming Boy; tell me, my better Genius,
What is the sweet Intelligence: Speak, while
A thousand Cupids hovering in the air
Snatch at thy words, and bear 'em, all perfum'd,
About the Heavens
Tarp
Oh I am ruin'd now beyond all cure
His tender words strike through my very Soul
[Aside
Cur
Will you not speak? Why will you torture me
With these delayes?
Tarp
Whither will this tumultuous passion drive me?
Now I am in, it thrusts me headlong on;
And bids me stop at nothing:—
[Aside
The Love, my Lord, comes from a Roman Lady,
My unhappy Sister.—
Cur
Tis gone again the empty shaddow leaves me,
Thy fortune Curtius laughs at all thy wishes,
And scorns thy Expectation.—
[Aside
Tarp
She saw you Sir, when you was last at Rome
You came, she saw you there, and was o'recome
Since as a Captive to your Name and merits,
She knows no joyes, but what must come from you
Yet is she Noble born, and for her Beauty
Natures not in her debt, nor Fortune for estate
'Tis she that sent me now to let you know
All her Command and interest in the City,
You may dispose of
Cur
Hah, this may be of use to my designes.—
[Aside
Must I not know her name?
Tarp
When you shall please first to discover, Sir,
Whether your heart be free of other love
Cur
I am as free as air.—Forgive me truth!
Forgive me more Divine Hersilia! —
[Aside
Now, Sir, her Name?
Tarp
Tarpeia
Cur
Her Father has Command o're the West-Gate,—
Tarp
He has, my Lord, and she as his Lieutenant
Cur
This is exceeding lucky,—
[Aside
Tell the dear Creature, your adored Sister,
I am all hers; but know not if I have
Enough of interest with her to demand
One real favour.—
Tarp
O speak, my Lord, I have a full Commission;
What e're I grant, she will confirm with joy
Cur
Be sure of what you say; I may perhaps
Demand a kindness of too great a value
And yet I would not hazard a denyal—
Tarp
Be bolder Sir, I'me sure you cannot ask
What she can scruple,—
Come Sir, what is the mighty tryal?
Cur
It is indeed a tryal of her Love;
Which if she grants, her passion if as mighty,
And well deserves my Love, my Life, my Soul—
But still I'm not assur'd that she will do't,
And I can't ask in vain
Tarp
My love grows wild!
I know not how to blush: O fatal hour—
[Aside
By Venus and her Son! By all the Oaths
Man can invent, you cannot ask that thing—
Cur
Hold; I beleive you Sir. Now I'le demand
With confidence; I ask, or rather beg
That she'd deliver up her Gate
To my possession—
Tarp
You had reason Sir, indeed; so long to question
Whether it wou'd be granted: Who cou'd suspect
That your request shou'd be of such a Nature?
Do Men demand of Maids that would oblige 'em
Favours like this? How e're since my engagement
Has run so high, and her Love, much, much higher,
It shall be done; with only this condition,
That when she gives the Gate to you, you then
Shall give your self to her, for ever,—
Cur
With Justice: O I will Love her, Marry her,
Adore her, had she no other merits;
She shall be my everlasting Mistress,—
Give her from me, lov'd Youth, this Ring, pledg of
My heart; and this, this dearer kiss. My Soul's
On torture till I see Tarpeia, —Hark
Be this the hour, and this the word
Whispers
Tarp
Enough: I'le cause a Souldier to attend your motion,
Beyond the Counterscarp, exactly at the minute
Cur
Wee'l lose no time: I'le go immediately,
And form a party, and give abroad new orders:—
Another kiss to my dear Mistress, and then Farewel,—
I come Hersilia! I am false for you;
Forgive me sacred Honour
[Aside
[ Exit Curtius
Tarp
What have I done?
Betray'd my City and my Honour too
Unhappy answer. But what is the reward?
The Noble Curtius Love. For his dear sake
I'de do it o're again: Betray a hundred Romes
As many worlds,—where hast thou lost thy self
Tarpeia? Is this a Roman mind? O I am ruin'd!
Yet since I have begun I must go through,
And will; the Dye is cast, what e're event
Succeeds, fear now is causless, or too late
Was this to see him once, and only see him?
Wou'd I had never made this fatel Journy
O cursed Female curiosity,
Thou hast demn'd half my Sex, and half demn'd me!
[Exit
SCENE II. The Pallace
Hersilia, Portia Cloe,
Hers
Is my dear Romulus still absent, does he
Not yet return? Sure he forgets Hersilia
I cou'd not be so very long from him
Portia, how long is it since my Lord parted?
Port
Scarce an hour, Madam
Hers
An hour, O false dissembler!
It is a day, a year, an age to me
How many ages does one hour contain,
When Lovers part! something sits heavy here;
O Portia, Cloe, help me to remove it
A case of Lead claps round about my heart,
So cold and heavy. Avert the Omen heaven
What means this sudden darkness? Do you not
Perceive it?
Cloe
No Madam, 'tis as light to us as ever
Hers
Tis night then in my eyes; and well it may
Since they can find no pleasing object here
How can I view my Sister drown'd in tears?
Tears that would soften Rocks: How can I hear
Her tender innocent heart break with more groans
Than come from a whole Army dying?
Can I with patience suffer this, and yet
My Romulus, my only comfort, absent?
Port
Be less afflicted, Madam: Why shou'd you make
Your fate worse than it is, why shou'd you meet
The evil hour and help it forward, thus?
Misfortune is too quick in her approaches:—
Feliciana cannot long continue
In this condition, and for the King,
We know, he's prosperous and well, and not
Far distant
Hers
O Portia, Portia! my ill boding thoughts
Carry but too much reason—
I had the other night a fatal dream;
Which tho I slighted then, it now returns
Fresh to my memory with all its terrours,—
Methought my Romulus and I wandred alone
A long a Meadow, near the silver Tiber;
Millions of flowers, and numberless their colours,
Both by their odour and delightful object,
Inviting us to rest on the soft Verdure,
We sate; and in a wanton emulation,
Culling the guady treasure of the Mead,
We deckt each others head and bosome with 'em,
Mixing for every flower as many kisses
Cloe
Thus far 'tis kind; a meer Elizian dream
Hers
True Cloe: But that which follows dismal—
The cruel River, envyous of our Loves,
Swell'd o're his banks, with such a sudden floud
We cou'd not possibly avoid its fury
In vain I call'd for help, in vain I strove
To save my dear Lords life, as vainly he
To save my dearer life, despised his own,
At last, both tyred with ineffectual pains,
We sunk and dyed Embracing
Port
It has indeed a sad conclusion, Madam,
But dreams, they say, have a quite different meaning
From what they promise; we may then conclude
Much joy from this, because it seems unhappy
Hers
Away, and do not flatter me to ruine
There's but one way I know to turn the Omen,
I'le expiate the fatal dream from my sick fancy.—
Hast to the Temple, Cloe, bid the Preist
Prepare the due Lustrations instantly
[ Ex. Cloe
When I have cleans'd my self of this foul dream
I'le Sacrifice to all the Genial Powers,
That favour Nuptial Vow's and vertuous Love,
For Romulus, my self, and hapless Sister.—
Port
Heaven cannot be unheedful of such merrits,
When fair Hersilia prays the Gods must hear,
Her vertue takes by force what they can give
Hers
Prophane impertient, I merit nothing,
Yet sure they'l hear me, tho it only be
For Romulus, and poor Feliciana, —
Come Portia, let us follow to the Temple,
[Exeunt
SCENE III. A Fort in Rome
Romulus, Spuruis Tarpeius
Rom
I Like your diligence, Tarpeius, well
You keep your Forts well Man'd, and in good order
The Enemy can never force us here
Tarp
I wou'd not live too see that fatal hour,
When all my faculties of soul and body,
Shou'd not appear continually imploy'd
To do my Prince and Country their best service,
Rom
Spoke like a worthy Souldier, and true Roman
Oh, Tarpeius, how great a loss have I?
Were it not for my dear Hersilia,
Who still remains, this world had nothing in it
Worth a mans living for. My friend! my friend!
Tarp
Hostilius?
Rom
Who but Hostilius?
Tarp
He is not dead?
Rom
To me and Rome he is, or rather we
Are dead without him, he was the very soul
Of friendship, life of Love, and the true Sun
Of Noble action. O! he has left us now
Tarpeius, but in so generous a manner,
That even his absence speaks more love to me
Than all the ever dear Remembrance
Of his past actions, sumn'd together.—Hah!
What suddain noise is this?
[A noise without, clashing of Swords, and crying Treason, and c
Enter a Souldier bloody
Sold
O save your self betimes, great Sir; away,
Or you are lost for ever, the Forts betray'd
The out-Guard, corrupted by some treacherous Devil,
Let in the Enemy, who pouring on us
With treble numbers, cut to peices all
That will not yeild to mercy—
Rom
Tarpeius!—
Tarp
I cannot answer Sir, to your too just
Suspitions, but I can dye to shew
I am no Villain— (Draws—) I abhor their favour
(Draws—)
And scorn my life, since it is now unuseful
[Is going to fall on his Sword
Rom
Hold—
If you are Loyal as you'd make me think,
Why shou'd not we two beat a thousand Traytors
Second me—
[Draws
Enter Curtius and Souldiers
Cur
Romulus here! Fortune thou art too kind!
I have not only won the stake intended,
But got a By more worth than all the City,
Rom
Stay degenerate, Sabine
Base as thou art to gain advantage by
Unmanly Treason, you have not yet
Subdu'd the Fort, while I am here and can
Command a Sword, you'l find one Romulus
More than a hundred narrow soul'd Plebeians
Tarp
Nor shall my Prince engage or fall alon
He still has left one Souldier who desires
No greater Glory than to dye thus,
Fighting by his dear side, for whom he lived
Cur
( To Rom.) I know you have been always brave, and now
( To Rom.)
Are desperate: I know you both wou'd die
Like Souldiers fighting; but you shall not—
Take 'em alive, and disarm the Mad-men,
[To his Soldiers
[They all fight, Rom. and Tarp. are incompass'd and disarm'd
Convey 'em now to stricter Guards, and keep 'em several
Rom
Poor and ignoble! Thou art below a Man
I scorn to lose my words on such a Brute
[Rom. and Tarp. are led off
Cur
Be it your Province, Fabius, to acquaint
The General with our success: Tell him
That I desire he would be with us quickly
Tell him the Cities all alarm'd and the
Streets barricado'd, yet if he lose no time
Ther's such confusion, they cannot possibly
Hold long against us; but delay is fatal—
Away with speed: Fly—
[Ex. Soldiers
Did he not say I am below a Man,
Poor and ignoble? Is that my Character?
Too true, alas, I find it,—
Thou hast too much of reason, Noble Roman
Methinks I hate my self, for the vile office
And yet I Love Hersilia to madness
To gain that mighty prize, I must be deaf
To the nice rule of honour, made by fools,
Thus I must win her or for ever lose her
Enter Tarpeia in her own Apparel
Tarp
My Lord the Fort is now intirely yours, and all
The Guards secur'd. Yet still there does remain
One dear Command that waits for your possession
Cur
Where? Shew me the place—
Tarp
'Tis no part of the works, but she that did Command 'em
Be not so strange my Love, 'tis I, that made
The Fortress yours, wait to be yours my self
Come my brave Conquerour: My greater Mars,
Receive those Joyes from me which Venus gave
Her God of war, when he arriv'd at Paphos —
What means this silence, sure you do not know me
I am Tarpeia: She that gave you all
You now possess in Rome, her Fathers Gate,
Her Father, self, and honour, yet thinks not all
Too dear to buy your Love,—Sure now you know me
Cur
Yes I do know you, Madam, you have given more
Than I indeed cou'd hope, and still wou'd more
Than I desire
[Coldly
Tarp
How, Sir, have you already lost
The memory of your late vows? Is it so long
Since you obliged your self, (if words have force)
On the condition, which you now possess,
To make me yours by Marriage? Am not I
The same Tarpeia still?
Cur
You are; but I
Not the same Curtius. Your beauty is your blemish,
And what you urge for merit shews you foul,
I cannot love a Traytress
Tarp
Let me hear this from Rome, and from my Father,
From you it is inhumane! I cou'd endure your Sword
With better ease, kill me, and expiate thus
The Crime of too much Love
Cur
Kill you? I wou'd not be so base to rule
The world: No, live, live to repent your shame
But do not think of me, I cannot Love
And therefore will not marry
Tarp
Thunder is musick in my ears to this—
Thou most unkind yet best beloved of Men
What have I done to be so soon forgotten?
[Weeps
Are my obleigments less by being acted?
Has some Serene blasted my Maiden beauty?
Am I grown old oth' sudden, my eyes dead
My cheeks all withered, nothing of the Rose
Left there, but wrinckles?—Come my Lord, I know
This is not real, you do but try my temper,—
When will you smile?
Cur
I am in earnest, do not torment your self
Or me, with further pleading, your words are lost
Tarp
Are neither words nor tears of force to make you kind?
Look Sir, a Lady kneels, thus low,
She sues to you, she for whose Love of late,
The bravest Youth of Rome have sued in vain
Cur
Hersilia, may not this deserve you? who
But I cou'd have neglected such an object?
[Aside
Tarp
Thou Rock! thou more inflexible than destiny!
Say, cruel man, if it becomes thee well
To see a Loving Lady kneel so long,
Any yet—and yet, not raise her
Cur
Pray rise—
Tarp
Shall I, to your affection? will you Love me?
Cur
No; I cannot
Tarp
Then I wil grow a Statue, and kneeling thus
Be an eternal Monument of your injustice,
Cur
Pray leave me, and forget me ever; hence forth
I will endeavour never to see you more
Tarp
Never to see me more, O perjur'd man!
False as the winds and Seas, which every minute
Alters! Thou rude Babarian! A Roman wou'd
Have sooner dyed, than thus, have wrong'd one of my Sex
Cur
This is too much for man to hear unmov'd,
Something within pricks at my heart, I feel
It made of flesh—
[Aside
Tarp
Have I for this betray'd
My Country, Father, nay by the event, my Prince,
And made the sweet Hersilia a Widdow?
Cur
Ha! that name revives me, and clears up all
The clouds of pity, that begun to geather—
[Aside
How long will you torment me? Leave for shame
To be impertinent, unwelcome Woman
Tarp
Wilt thou not break with this? O heart, too, too
Induring
[Still on the ground and weeping
Enter Tatius
Tat
Your Messenger has told me, Curtius,
Of your success, and how you are successful
I like the event, but disaprove the means
'Tis base to gain by Treason: But since 'tis done,
We must not lose the advantage.—
What Woman's this, and why in such a posture?
Cur
Neglect her Sir, she is not worth your knowledge
Tarp
O do me justice, Sir, if you Command
The Sabines, shew your self fit for rule and do me Justice
Tat
Rise, and now speak with assurance; shou'd your cause,
Concern my self, I'de do you right severely
Tarp
I am the unhappy Daughter of Tarpeius,
I need not tell you that he held this Fort,
Till I betray'd it to this perjured Man,
Who now denys me his dear purchased Marriage
Tat
Thou hast condemn'd thy self, unworthy Maid
Why should you hope that Faith or Love from him
Which you deny'd your Father and your Country!
A Traytors Sentence shou'd be your, in Justice
'Tis mercy lets you live, and gives you freedom—
Shew me the works, and then to Romulus
[To Curtius
[ Exit Tatius, Curtius
Tarp
Slighted, despised, unpityed, and is this
All the reward the Sabines give for treason?
O curst deceiver, curst be the hour I saw him;
And curst be I for seeing! O damn'd, damn'd Love
That found out such a Villain! but this is idle;
So are all words; blood and revenge inspire me,
Something I'le do to cleanse my sully'd name,
Or with my life lose all the the sense of shame
[Exit
ACT. IV
SCENE I. A Prison
Romulus Solus
THE world and I should be at even terms,
Weary of one another, wear it not for
My dear Hersilia: While she is here
I cannot think of dying: My Heaven's in Rome
'Tis she that holds my hand, and bids me live,
Or else I'le quickly give my self the freedom,
Which these false Sabines have deny'd me.—Ha!
Do I dream waking? Or am I really asleep
And fancy this fair vision, like Hersilia?
Enter Hersilia
Hers
My dearest Lord! are you not much surprized,
[Embracing
Rom
Extreamly, almost as much surprized as pleased,
Hers
Ill news has wings: I soon heard this misfortune
Twas death to me to be a minute from you
Attended by one Servant only, I flew hither,
Some small acquaintance, and a greater bride
Open'd the Guard, and once again I see
My Romulus, my life! but time admits
Few words, you shall not dwell in this Confinement
Rom
Had you the Prison keys, I know I should not
Hers
Let us retire, and change our habits quickly
You shall return in mine, and leave me here
Rom
Never till now could I deny Hersilia;
I must not now obey you, Sweet; nor Love,
Nor honour will permit it, No, I will dye
A thousand deaths, a thousand several wayes
Sooner than leave you here
Hers
I beg it
Rom
O do not beg that I should Love you less,
Ask not so much injustice
Enter Tatius, Curtius
Tat
Did you not say he was alone, how came
This Woman with him?
[ To Curtius
Cur
Ha! Hersilia? I am amaz'd
[Aside
Tat
My Daughter here! Heavens, I am more successful,
Than I expected,— Curtius the war is ended
Nothing remains but Execution now,
In those two Criminals.—Do you not feel
A terrour at my sight, can I appear
Less frightful, then your evil genius to ye!
Have you forgot the injured Tatius, or
The Crime which you so late committed?
Rom
I never knew what terrour was; less now
Than ever,—
If it becomes you to insult on this
Base gain'd advantage, it does not me to fear
Tat
It least of all becomes a Man of Honour,
To do like Romulus; Ravish invited Maids,
And then out-brave the Justice, that attends,
The foul, false, treacherous act
Rom
Speak better of such acts since they are yours
You had not now been here, nor I compell'd
To hear such Language, were it not for Treason
Tho you, I see, have lost your temper, Sir,
I must not lose the due respect I owe
Hersilia 's Father, else I should tell you
How falsly that it called a Rape, which was
Consent, free and without Compulsion
Tat
That which you call consent, does not at all
Make you less guilty, but my Daughter more
It shewes her to have been Confederate
In her own Rape, a party in the Crime,
Equally guilty with her Ravisher
And since by natures Law the Parent has
An absolute Dominion, o're his issue,
How cou'd she give her self away to any,
And not rob me? this is your Sentence then,
(And were you both as dear to me as my two eyes,
I wou'd not bate the rigour, of true Justice)
Since you have both been actors in a Crime
Abhorr'd by Nature, ye shall both die togeather
You for your Rape, You for your Disobedience
Hers
Both die, O cruel Father! Sir, I yeild
To your just sentence on your Daughter: I know
I have offended: much, much offended,
In daring to bestow my Love without
Your knowledge; nay, where I knew you hated
I'me very guilty, Sir, and over me,
I know, you have the power of life and death,
Use it freely. You have condemn'd me justly,
But on my kees I beg, that I alone,
May dye, and not the noble Romulus
'T was I that moved him to the Rape you mention
Who would refuse a Ladies offer'd Love?
Besides consider, Sir, he is a Prince,
At least, your equal, his life's not in your power
The Law of Arms allows him to be ransom'd
Rom
Hear this you Goddesses, and take Example
From a weak mortals Love! thou Miracle,
Of Conjugal affection, why should you injure
Your own innocence so highly, and all
To favour one, who ought not to be pitty'd,
Since he has been the occasion of your ruine?—
'Tis I, great Sir, 'tis I am only guilty;
Take in my blood your full revenge, but spare
The innocent; I gladly yeild to death,
I'le quit you too from all aspertion,
I'le say you are not cruel, not unjust,
If she may live—
Tat
My Sentence is irrevocable,
And you have both confest enough to clear
Me of injustice: You shall both die
Rom
Spare your own blood, Sir, Tygers will not prey
On their own young one's; let it not be said
By mourning Lovers, who shall hear this story
Hersilia, sweet Hersilia had no fault
But that she was the inhumane Tatius Daughter
Hers
O plead no more for me my d earest Husband,
If you must die I will not live, without you
'Twere cruelty to think it,— ( To Tatius) Sir, I beseech you,
( To Tatius)
Regard not what he says, if when he dies
You will be so unkind to spare my life,
I can find ways enough to follow him
Should you be still more cruel, and prevent me,
Yet grief would quickly break my heart, in pity
Tat
It shall not need:—No, you shall die together
Trust me I am afflicted for you both,
But I must grieve in silence; sacred Justice
Is far more dear to me than my own life:—
See the effects of Rash, unthinking Love!
Take your eternal farewel of each other
This hour is yours, the next you are no more
Curtius attend me
[ Exeunt Tat. Cur
[Romulus and Hersilia remain silent a while
Rom
Tatius, (I cannot say your Father) Madam,
Permits me the sad favour, e're we part,
To take my everlasting farewel of you
But with what face can I approach Hersilia?
Or with what eye can she behold the wretch
Unto whose fatal Love she owes her ruine?
O had you rather chosen a poor Cottage,
Than my unhappy Pallace, a Sabine Shepheard
Before the King of Rome, you had not then
Known this sad change, nor I the sense of such
A guilt, that wracks my very Soul to pieces
Hers
How long has Romulus lost that great Soul,
Which he received from a Coelestial Father?
For yielding thus to fate, sure he has lost it
Unduly shou'd we use, my dearest Lord,
Those small remains of life, that still are left us
By such ill tim'd complaints, as these, to whet
That grief, which has but too much edge already
What have I done, that you shou'd think I value
This severe turn of fortune, when compar'd
To your dear Love? O banish the false thought
My passion sees in you something more great
Than Crowns, something above the power of fate
'Tis Romulus I Love, and not Dominion
Rom
Ye Gods! why should I live beyond this moment?
Let me die pleas'd, now, now, before her feet,
From whom I hear such words. When I consider
The never equall'd Love of my Hersilia,
And what I lose, rage and despair possess me
What man can think that so Divine a Soul
Must leave that fair abode, unjustly too,
And in his heart at the same time not feel,
Compassion sharper than the Tyrants Steel?
Hers
Why shou'd you be concern'd, where I am not?
I kiss my Sentence, whatsoever it be,
To live or die, it is the same thing to me
Shou'd I appear to weep, Judge when I do;
Whether those tears fall for my self or you
Rom
No more, my Love; O spare a breaking heart,
You peirce my Soul in the most tender part
O rather flatter my credulity,
Tell me to save your life, that I must die
If at that price your safety cou'd be bought,
How blest were I! there's Heaven in such a thought?
Hers
My Romulus is in his Love fevere,
He'd be a God alone, and leave me here;
Much kinder was my Father in that breath
That spoke our fate; he Marry'd us in death
O happy, happy Sentence! when we die,
With equal pace, we'l both ascend the skie
While, as we mount, Mortals, that see the Ray
Of our United flames out-shine the day,
Shall call us happy Lovers, envy us,
And think no joyes of Love like dying thus
Rom
The Gods, the Gods invite us up, I know
Something within me sayes it must be so
Let us make haste my Love, and leave behind
The names to which this world as been unkind
I will be thy Quirinus, thou shalt be
Heber, the ever fair, and young to me
When seated in our new Coelestial state,
How we shall smile at Tatius and his hate
All Romans with our favours we will bless,
But be most kind to Lovers in distress
Hers
No mournful youth in vain shall shed a tear,
No hapless Maid shall sigh, but we will hear
Rom
We'l ease their inward wounds, heal their despair,
And against fate fight for the brave and fair
Hers
But where a matchless pair of Lovs I find
Wrong'd by a Parent, cruelly unkind,
I'le her Hersilia call, him Romulus
We needs must favour them, for they are us
Rom
We wrong our selves, and all our joys delay,
Let's seek out death, and meet fate half the way
Hers
Come my dear Lord—
[Taking his hand
Thus Joyn'd we'l rise to a Divinity,
'Tis death to live, when 'tis so sweet to die
[Exeunt
SCENE II. Scene the Pallace in Rome. A Couch
Cornelia, Cloe
Cloe
WHat's to be done, Cornelia? We are left
Methinks like travellers, that lose their guides,
Unknowing both the Language and the Country
Romulus they have made Captive, Hersilia
Will have no Liberty without him, but gives her self
To the same Prison freely; yet shou'd I tell
Her Sister this, it would but more undoe her
Cor
Poor Lady! since Hostilius went from Rome,
She is no longer she, we have lost her too
Cloe
I have a Captain, my most obedient servant,
Tho I confess he does me little service,
He being now continually on duty,
I'de be content to lose my man for ever
Could I but bring Hostilius back to give
The harmless Maid her pretty wits again
Cor
In an ill hour the Romans have committed
That which our Parents call a Rape, if thus
Our, men themselves so soon are Ravisht from us
Cloe
But who Ravish't Hostilius? Nothing but his own
Heroick Friendship, a shame take these Honourable intrigues,
They cause more harm than good, all our misfortunes
Are owing to his absence,
Cor
Cloe, no more—
See where she comes with such a pitty'd air,
In her distracted innocence, that makes me weep to see her
Enter Feliciana
Feli
Why did you tell me, Cornelia, that my Sister
Is rid away behind Hostilius? Indeed you are to blame,
For tho I know, he does not love me, I'me sure
Hersilia wou'd not do it for a kingdome
Yet were it true, cou'd you be so unkind
To tell it me?
Cor
I never said it, Madam
Feli
I ask your pardon heartily, Cornelia
It was not you indeed.—See where my Sister
Stands yonder, sorting pretty Pinks, and Dasies,
With Violets and yellow Crocus's,
To make a wedding Garland for Hostilius,
Yet will not give me one poor flower among 'em
No matter, I have Roses of my own
Enough to strew me when I'm dead
SINGS
White as the Lilly will she lye
When the foolish Maid shall die,
For she carry'd with her, her Viginity
O fie, O fie
—Is not that Cloe?
Cor
Yes Madam
Feli
Then it is not my Sister, I knew so much
Already, tho you think I know nothing
Cloe
When will you try to sleep dear Madam!
Feli
O Cloe I shall never sleep again
Hostilius will not let me sleep, least I
Should dream of him—Is not that unkind?
Cor
Pray try what charmes there are in Musick, Madam
Feli
Let it be mournful then, for should they play
A Cheerful air, and I so merry as I am,
Twou'd make me mad—ha, ha, ha, ha,—
But tis no matter, I'le sit down here and weep
[Soft Musick
No more, I hate these Viols: Hostilius is a Souldier
Let me hear voices: Sing a Trumpet to me
[To a Martial Air
SONG
Make hast fair Queen of Cyprus, tarry not
Have-you the impatient Love of Mars forgot?
He bleeds, he bleeds, from wounds unseen,
That know no cure but such a Queen
You are the only Surgeon has the art
To cure a God' that's wounded in the heart
See, the fair Queen of Cyprus does appear,
While all the wither'd beauties of the year
Start up and smile, to feel her bring,
Something more welcome than the Spring
The Rose and Iessamine, perfume the air,
Yet do her Garlands take their sweetness from her hair
She comes, she comes, she comes a Lovers pace
With all the smiles of Heaven in her face
Chorus
Why should not than the brave be fortunate?
Why shou'd the fair be hapless in their Love?
When the Coelestial powers that rule their fate
Keep such a kind intelligence above?
Feli
Fetch me a Roman Pile, aud Sabine Shield,
I'le after the ungrateful Runegade,
[Starting up
And force him back to duty—alas, alas,
Laugh at me good Cornelia, prithee laugh
Can I force him whom mighty Cupid could not?
I saw the little God shoot all his Arrows at him,
And still Hostilius fenced, and fenced, and fenced
'Em all away; and still as they came,
He filcht them all into his own Quiver
At last the boy sate down and wept for having lost
His Arrows: But what did I?
I went up boldly to the pretty Child,
And strok't him thus; be comforted said I,
[ Stroaks Cor
I'le give thee new Artillery, sweet infant
I'le give my boy a Quiver full of sighs
At this the Urchin smil'd: Ah! foolish Girl, said he,
Sighs are indeed sort of Arrows, but they
Can only wound her breast that shoots 'em
Cor. and Cloe
Dear Madam try to sleep once more
Feli
I will, I will, I will, I will,—
[Sits down again
But then you must not sing another Trumpet;
I hate the thought of war, Hostilius is
Too much a Soldier! Sing any thing but that,
And I will try to sleep in earnest
SONG
Where art thou God of dreams; for whose soft chain
The best of Mankind ever do complain;
Since they affect to be thy Captives before Liberty
Vnkind and disobliging Deity!
He flies from Princes and from Lovers Eyes
Yet every night with the poor Shepheard lies?
II
Shew thy self now a God, and take some care
Of the distressed Innocent and fair
To rest, to rest, dispose the pitty'd Maid, her eye-lids close
Gently, as evening dews shut up the Rose
Then bear in silent whispers to her ear
Such pleasing words as Virgins love to hear
Cloe
She sleeps, she sleeps, Cornelia! Happy minute
Let us withdraw, for fear we should disturb
The blessed slumber
[They come forward, and the Scene shuts upon Feliciana
Cloe
But while our care's imploy'd her for Feliciana,
We must not lose the memory of Hersilia
We are obliged in Honour to find some means
To free the Noble Lovers
Cor
Poor Cloe, what are we weak helpless Maids
To attempt so brave and act, when all the force
In Rome can hardly, hope to do it?
Enter Portia, weeping
Port
If you have any tears in store, now, now
Is the sad fatal hour arriv'd to spend 'em,
If you have eyes, shew it, and weep, for mine
Already are quite lost in sorrows—
The Noble Romulus, and his Hersilia,
That Glorious pair of Captives, are by Tatius
(O cruel Sabine, O scandal of our Nation)
Sentenc'd to death, and now the cursed minute
Comes on apace, when the inhumane Sentence
Must have a more inhumane Execution
Cloe
So sad a tale, as this, tho but a fiction,
Cannot be heard without some tears?
[Weeps
For sure, my Portia, you but dissemble with us,
Or if you be in earnest, yet Tatius, is not
He cannot be so barbarous
Port
Oh never hope it, he is grown a Monster
Justice the best of vertues is in him
The worst of vices, since he can act
A cruelty like this, and call it Justice
Cloe
And is this true? Happy Feliciana,
Whose want of sense secures her from this new sorrow
Wou'd I too were distracted
Cor
I will not be so vain to wish, where I
Can rule my fate: I'le die with my dear Lady
I need no other Tyrant then my grief,
Sorrow shall do the part of Tatius to me
Port
I love my Queen as much as any can;
I cou'd indure a thousand prisons for her;
Suffer a thousand sorrows, nay I could wish,
Wish heartily, that I were dead to save her
But when I think I am a dying,—
Oh how I tremble: death is a thing of such
An ugly form, so old, and full of horror,
It never can agree with a young Virgins fancy
Cloe
How poor a thing it is to be a woman;
Ah helpless sex! we have desires, yet still
Want power to act them. Come my sad Companions,
Let us all try to melt away in tears
In such a death no frightful shape appears,
Insensibly we shall be eased from care,
As Eccho once, in sighs dissolv'd to air
[Exeunt
SCENE III. The Street
Enter Hostilius
Host
I Cannot go out of the sight of Rome,
How long have I been wandring to no pupose?
Like strangers straying in a wood, I think
To Travel forward, but am indeed
Brought back, insensibly to my first station
Sure something is forgot; shou'd not I see
Hersilia, 'ere I part? It must be so,
Goodmanners say I shou'd. O I dare not
To see her, O to stay for ever here
And lose my generous thought; my boasted friendship
No, I will on: I'le spur my testy Nature,
And make the dull Jade travel forward, forward;
It is a glorious journy, and I will go
[Exit
Enter Tarpeia, in Mans Apparel, but different from the former
Tarp
'Tis requisite, I should redeem my honour
In the same garb I lost it; my designe,
Is much too Masculine for my own habit
O Curtius, Curtius, that I cou'd remove thee
From Rome, and from the world, with as much ease
As from Tarpeia's, much abused affection
But let it be: The greater difficulty,
The greater glory. Wert thou arm'd with thunder,
Fenced with a wall of Adamant, and Seas
Deeper and feircer, than the Adriatick,
I'de find a way to thy perfidious heart;
And tell thee there what's due from injur'd Love
Enter Hostilius
Host
How much in vain do we resolve to act
What fate forbids? The Gods have drawn a line,
And tho I strain and summon all my powers,
They hold me back; and laugh at my endeavors
I must not, cannot pass the fatal limits
Rome I am thine again! The Gods that bring me here
Let them preserve my Honour
Tarp
Now fortune, if thou art a Goddess, help me
Honour, if thou art more then a bare name,
Assist me, since I act not for revenge
Alone, but Romulus my injured King
Host
Ha! did not that boy name Romulus? I cannot
Hear that dear name, but I must wish to see him—
You mentioned, Youth, the King: Is he this way?
Tarp
Where has the brave Hostilius been to ask
That question? Can Romulus be a Captive,
And he, his nearest friend, not know it?
Host
What do I hear? Speak out thou fatal Messenger
Of killing news; delay me not with questions,
But answer mine directly. Where is my King, My Romulus?
Tarp
In the West-Tower, a Captive there to Tatius
Host
Was this the cause I could not go from Rome?
Was it for this my steps forsook my conduct,
And erring right, have wandred back again?
O sacred Providence, I now adore thee!—
Admire not boy, that I'm a stranger here,
I have been absent, a Truant from the City;
And now returning, yet for a private reason
I 've shun'd the sight and speech of all I met.—
But one word more for I am call'd to action
How has this news agreed with fair Hersilia?
And where is she?
Tarp
A Prisoner with her Husband
Freely she gave her self to the same fetters
She lov'd too well to be at large without him
Host
And is the sweet Hersilia too a Captive?
What Romulus, and his Hersilia too!
Fortune invites me to the greatest Glory,
To Sacrifice my life, or free at once,
The two most lov'd by me of all Mankind
Tarp. (Aside.)
I've ruin'd my own project; O! he'l prevent me,
And I shall never get again my houour,
Nor give a due revenge to injur'd Love,
Shou'd I be thus defeated. ( To Hostilius,) However, tho
Affairs are very desperate, yet I
Have form'd a way to free the Noble Lovers
I beg the brave Hostilius would permit it
Host
Heavens! This is another Rival: Hersilia's beauty
Makes all Mankind, of every age, adorers
How fate has spited me? altho I know
He loves my Mistress, yet such a Rival Child
Is much below my notice.—
[Aside
Thou form a way to free 'em,—alas, poor boy!
Who owns this stragling Child?—
Thou free the Noble Lover's: What darst thou do to free 'em?
Tarp
Sir, tho I think, I dare as much as any,
Encounter fire and water, fight against all
The Elements, endure a thousand wounds,
And every wound, a several death; yet what
I have designed is not to be effected
By over daring, but by address and wit
Force is too desperate, my way is sure,
If you, not ruine all by acting rashly
Suffer me then to act alone, I beg it
The Honour, Sir, of my whole life's concern'd
Host
His honour? 'tis so, aye he must love Hersilia,
He could not else be so concern'd and earnest.—
[Aside
Thy Honour Boy! whats that, who ever heard
Of a Boys Honour?
Tarp
My Love, my life, and my revenge will suffer
Host
His Love, Horror!
[Aside
It is an impudent request, that I
[ To Tarp
Should stand unactive in a cause like this.—
Thy honour suffer! Dam it: Mine will more ▪
As infinitely more,
As there is difference 'twixt my Love and thine
Go poor effeminate Creature, use thy ways
Of fraud and treachery, fit for boys or women
I'le be a Man, and force the prison open
[Exit
Tarp
He'l ruine my design infallibly,
Unless I give it speedy Execution
I must effect it then, while he is drawing
A party up for the assault, or never
He must lose time, but I can't spare one minute
Fortune assist me: Revenge and hate inspire me
[Exit
Scena ultima, The Fort
Enter Curtius and Tarpeius
Cur
I've open'd all my heart Tarpeius to you,
Because I know your interest with Romulus
You can prevail with him: You see what power
I have to make my offers good.— Tatius
Has given this Fort to me, and I have here
An absolute Command, since he return'd back to the Camp
Tarp
You have indeed made me a large Confession,
But I'me not sure I understand you right,
I think you say you love the fair Hersilia;
And as a means to gain her wrought this war,
And got my Fort by Treason.—
Cur
True
Tarp
You tell me, she and Romulus are both
To die, Condemn'd by Tatius for the Rape;
But notwithstanding, if I'le prevail with him
To quit Hersilia to your love, you'l give
Him Liberty, and me my Fort again.—
Cur
Most willingly
Tarp
I think you said you never lov'd the Treason
But for Hersilia's sake. That 'twas my Daughter
Betray'd the Gate, for which alone you hate her,
And fain would give it back on these conditions—
Cur
Most true
Tarp
No, hate my Daughter still, hate her as much
As I do; It is the only act of all thy Life,
That shews thee good or brave: Know thou most vile
Of all the Sabines, that the King of Rome
Has not so poor Soul, but he had rather
Lose twenty thousands lives, than but one thought
(The least of all his thoughts) for his Hersilia
Cur
And will you not perswade him?
Tarp
Yes: Where he not already fixt I would
Perswade him, and use all means, all Arguments
To settle him in such a Resolution.—
'Tis well for thee, I am thy Prisoner, Curtius
Had I my Liberty, and Sword again
I'de answer in another phrase, and tell
Thy heart, what 'tis to tempt a Roman to
So base an action
Cur
Are you so brave; Ho there without; who waits
Enter Guard
Take him and guard him strictly, on your lives
Let him not speak to any, nor be seen
[Exeunt Guard and Tarp
I'me at a loss, my best design is blasted,
Yet I'le not give it o're, Hersilia's Love
Has joyes enough to recompence, a thousand crosses
Enter a Souldier and Tarpeia
Sol
Yonder's my Captain, Sir, at leisure too,
But you must leave your Sword with me
Tarp
Take it.—
[Gives her Sword
Hail to the Noble Curtius, if you be he?
I have affiars that touch you very nearly
Cur
I am the man, if they concern my life;
Speak boldly
Tarp
They do, and what's more near, your love
Cur
Speak softly, Boy. The very name of love
Hath something in't so sacred, it requires
A private ear and ought not to be heard
By any unconcern'd; the profane vulgar
Withdraw, and suffer none whoever, to
[To the Soldier
Approach this way, till I give notice
[Ex. Sold
Tarp
It is indeed a mighty secret Sir,
And we can't be too private
Cur
True Boy,—
[Locks the door
Now speak
Tarp
I am sent hither from the fam'd Sybilla —
Cur
About my Love? Ay, Ay, I do not doubt it
'Tis such a strong and violent passion, Boy,
The Gods may well take notice of it
What says the Prophetess? Did she not name
Hersilia in the Message? If she did not,
O never speak it to me; all other words
Are discords in my ear
Tarp
She did, she did,
She nam'd the sweet Hersilia often,
And said,—But first, see my Credentials, Curtius. —
Look Sir, this is her hand, and this; no, this—
She gives him a Letter, and as he is opening it to read, she comes up, and looking over his left Shoulder, as if she would instruct him in something, whips out his Sword
Turn hither Monster, and behold thy Hell,
Before you feel the flames,— I am Tarpeia. —
Nay stir not, or by all the Gods, and all
The Devils, like thy self, I'le nail thee to
The ground: tho I am a Woman, yet I am
Inspir'd with all the force and fury now of twenty men
Cur
It is the very she;
What a dull beast was I not to suspect
That face! my Love transported me to ruine
[Aside
Tarp
Tremble, and hear me thou inhumane Villain
I come prepar'd to take a full revenge
For all my slighted Love, my ruin'd honour,
For Romulus, my Country, and my Father
I value not my life, when I have thine
I'le give mine freely up to any torment
Cur
How have I wrong'd you, Madam? You know too well,
Our passion's not at our own choice, if fate
Has pointed your love this way, mine to another,
It is your fate has wrong'd you, and not I
Tarp
Unheard of impudence! face of a Devil!
Can you say this to me? To me who have
Betray'd my King, my Country, Father, All,
For thou perfidious wretch? 'Tis not thy Love
I value now, but seek for my lost honour:—
Didst thou not swear, thy Love was free? and by
That specious bait tempt me to be a Devil?
Give me my faith again I owe my Country
Give me again my Innocence, false man,
Make me no traytor.—O it can not be!
My names all over fully'd, black, black, as Hell,—
But I will wash it in thy blood: I'le search
The fountain of thy veins, suck thy hearts blood,
Then knaw the flesh into a thousand peices,
And grieve the diet will not last for ever
Cur
Where are my Guards? O that they knew my danger!
Will no kind Demon tell 'em.—Ho! without
Tarp
Nay if you open, Hell-hound, then have at thee
[Makes at him, he strives to defend himself, but is wounded
Cur
Yet spare my life and I will pardon all
I 'le Love thee too, give back the Fort and Prisoners
Tarp
Abhorred Creature! no: I now hate more
Than I e're lov'd, tho I lov'd more than any
Wert thou more suppliant at my feet, than I
Too lately was at thine, I'd spurn at thy
Petitions, thus; and be more cruel,
If it were possible, than thou wer't, Devil
As for the Fort, I'le quickly take that back
But first thy life.—
[Assaults him again
Guard
To Armes, to Armes: Where are you Curtius?
[Without
Captain to Armes, to Armes, we are surpriz'd
[Knocking
Cur
Make hast and break the door
Tarp
I'le open first a door to thy false heart
[Curtius closes Tarp. and as they are striving, the Guard enter
Guard
Ha! Curtius, unarm'd and wounded? See the young Traytor
Oh Murderous Villain!—
[The Guard wound Tarp
Cur
Forbear, it is a Woman,—
[Curtius disarms her
Guard
O Sir, the Forts in danger,—the Romans headed
By their Hostilius, pour like a torrent on us
We want your Countenance and conduct
Cur
I am much wounded, but I think none mortal
On to the danger,—
[To Tarp, as he goes off
Despised thing, false both to Rome and me,
Make use of these few minutes I'le but secure
My Guard, at my return expect
The due reward which all thy Treasons Merit
[Ex. Cur. cum suis
Tarp
Yes, I will use the time—I bleed: Tis nothing,
The sight does but incourage me to action
O that I had a Sword! I'le to the assault
While all is in Confusion, I cannot miss
A weapon on the place: My Country calls;
My help, though weak ▪ will yet assist her something
Could I die fighting for her, I were happy
When life's a burthen, all our fortune cross,
To lose it Nobly then; how sweet's the loss?
[Exit
ACT. V
SCENE I. The Fort
Hostilius, Souldiers, Tarpeia
Host
THE Fort is ours again: But we have strangely
Mist the Commander
Sol
Sabinus Curtius, Sir, when he perceived
All past Redemption, with some few Officers,
Forced their way through us, and fled safely over
To their own Camp: the rest are Prisoners
Host
My little Rival there, and bloody too?
I see he's more a Man than I expected,
[Aside
Know you that Boy?
[To the Soldier
Sol
I found him, Sir, amidst the thickest danger,
Fighting on our side, fiercely, till spent with loss
Of blood, a rough old Sabine, had seiz'd
And wou'd have kill the fainting Youth, when I
Stept in and saved him
Host
It was well done, and I 'le reward you for it
All favour's due to such an early Courage.—
Thou art a Gallant Boy, and I repent
[ To Tarp
I chid thee lately, prithee reveal thy Name,
That we may know, to whom we give our praises
Tarp
It is not worth your knowledge, brave Hostilius,
My Name's dishonourable, worse than none,
Unless I get a Name that's worth the speaking
I beg to die unknown.—
Sol
See Sir, the Royal Prisoners come to meet you,
Enter Romulus, Hersilia, Spu. Tarpeius
Rom
Do we see our Hostilius once again?
I cannot say, in which I am most happy,
To see my friend restored, or Liberty.—
O, my Hersilia, now we cannot die;
This world is too inviting: All our joyes
Return, and we shall now be Gods in Rome
Host
The happiness is mine, blessed am I,
That I am pointed out to serve my King,
My best of Friends, and (whom I blush to name,)
The sweet Hersilia: It is a glorious office!
The very boys have so much sense of Honour;
And think it Heaven to die in such a cause
This youth endeavour'd it as well as I
[ Pointing to Tarp
Sp. Tarp
Ha! my Daughter in disguise! O thou shame
Of Roman Maids. Take this reward of Treason—
[ Draws and runs at her, Hostilius steps between
Host
Hold! What means the Mad-man? Wou'd you reward
With death, him, who still bleeds from all these wounds
Received so lately in his Countries quarrel?
Sp. Tarp
Persist not in an Errour, good Hostilius,
This is no Boy, but my accursed Daughter,—
With-hold me not, I have a Parents Right,
And claim to take her life at my own freedom
Rom
That Argument I never will allow of,
'Twas used against Hersilia
Host
I am amazed! can any woman have,
A Soul so Masculine?
Sp. Tarp
Say rather, so degenerate, and full of horrour,
Since this is that false Devil that betray'd
The Fort, her King, and Father, to the Sabines
Rom
This is all Riddle, how cou'd she betray
Her Prince, who has expos'd her life to save him
I must examine this more strictly,—
Romulus goes over, and discourses with Tarpeia, and her Father, while Hostilius and Hersilia come forward
Hers
Hostilius you have merited from me so highly
In freeing my dear Lord, from instant death,
That I should be confounded much, to make
A due acknowledgment of such a service
Did I not know of a reward will please you
Host
I'me stupifi'd. I know not what to answer
I dare not look: I dare not trust, my eyes
With the dear object.—
[Aside
Hers
Do you not mind me Sir, Why do you look
Another way?—Yours merits are too modest
Host
In vain I guard my eyes: In vain I keep
That Post secure: My ear, my ear betrays me.—
Aside
Too much reward it is already, Madam,
[ To Hersilia
For me to hear such words from fair Hersilia
What man can merit such kind words, and live?
If I had dyed in such a cause, as this,
Perhaps the sweet Hersilia might have then
Applauded me with better Justice
Hers
No more of this.—
As soon as we return back to the Pallace
Be you in the Court Garden
I'le meet you there in the close Mirtle-walk,
And then confer, the dear reward I mention
Host
I dare not understand her meaning.—
Now, now, Hostilius, summon all thy vertue,
Call all thy Honour to thy help, for all
Is much too little.—
Rom
So brave an act, after so base a Treason
I never knew the same hand guilty of
Sp. Tarp
I cannot yet receive her for my Daughter,
The stain of Treason is indelible,
Nor has she purg'd her Crime by her late service
Since she was bound to that, tho she had ne're
Offended.—She ought to die
Rom
Spurius Tarpeius, no: You give your Prince
Dishonourable Counsel. Shou'd I forget
Her wounds still bleeding? Ingratitude's in me
Almost as great a blemish as her Treason
Tarp
If you intend me any favour Sir?
If I have merited in my last action?
Do as my Father urges. Take my life
Since I mist that of Curtius, mines a Burden,
A shame, a Torment to me. Had I but
Recover'd my lost Honour: Had not my
Revenge, my Glory, my intended service
Been all defeated by Hostilius coming,
I then cou'd have endured to live,
Or any fate, life had not been uneasie.—
If you'l not give me death as a reward?
If I appear to ask too great a Boon?
Confer it as a Punishment for Treason
If neither way I can have what I beg
Sullen, and out of favour with my fortune,
I'le try to give my self what you deny me
Hers
Will you, Tarpeia, stand to my decission?
Tarp
With all my Soul: I'me sure the sweet Hersilia
Will give me what I ask, a speedy death;
Since by my act, she and her Romulus
Were both so very near it
Hers
Then, with my dear Lords leave, this is my Sentence
Tarpeia, you shall live: And yet to please you,
I will inflict a Civil death, you shall,
During your life, be a devoted Recluse,
A Vestal, ever serving at the Altar,
And Sacrifice for us whom you have wrong'd
Rom
Now to Mount Palatine: Come my Captive Queen,
And change a Prison, for a Court, Joys tast
More sweet, when relisht by afflictions past
[ Ex. Omnes. Preter Tarpeia
Tarpeia alone, two of the Guards at a distance
Tarp
A Nun! O no: The thought is worse than death
Can I, I who have felt so many fires
In my own breast, whose heart has burnt so long
In Love and fury, that I am now all ashes?
Can I—
Tamely submit to guard the Vestal Flames?
Pardon me Goddess; Pardon me Hersilia;
I have not Soul enough to live at ease.—
O Earth, Earth, Earth! Take me to your Embraces
[Lies down
Why shou'd I use the air? My Soul's all fled,
Spent and evaporate in fruitless Passion
There's nothing left to poor Tarpeia now
But a base fordid Lump of worthless mould
Colour, that fleeting Summer shade, and all
That little Beauty I once had, has left me
Like a false dream, 'tis vanisht in a moment
Yet I have still a name remains: Ah, less
Then nothing! unless it cou'd survive with Glory
To cleanse thy spoted name, die then, Tarpeia;
Nothing but death can give a life to fame
[Seeing the Guards
(Rising) Ha! my Sorrows are betray'd:—Unmanner'd Villains,
(Rising)
Do you stay here as Spies upon my action?
[Draws
Guard
We wait here, Madam, by the Kings Command
Our duty is to see you safely lodged
In Vesta's Temple.—
Tarp
Forbear: And know your distance, base Plebeians;
I have not leasure yet to be Religious.—
O! I am much opprest: Too much black blood
[Aside
Lies heavy at my heart, and drowns my Spirits
But I will give it vent.—Stay, I have here,
Full on my breast, a Sabine wound imperfect
What Curtius Soldiers have begun, I'le finish
Through the same Orifice I'le send my steel
Into that wound which Curtius gave my heart
O loved and hated Name! Since he refused
The Joys of Love, thus I'le remove the pains
[Falls on her Sword
1. Guard
O she has kill'd her self! the mad Virago
Has out done all her former actions, here
Call for more help.—
2. Guard
Help, there within; Tarpeia bleeds to death!
Enter Tarpeius, Attendants
Sp. Tarp
What means this suddain out-cry? Ha!
Is still Tarpeia here? My shame still here? Not yet a Vestal?
1. Guard
O Sir, behold your Daughter lies expiring
Wild with her discontents, from her own Sword
She took that death which you so much desired,
And Romulus denyed
Sp. Tarp
She bleeds: Kind Heavens! from her own hand she bleeds
O truly Roman! Let me embrace my Daughter
I am not now ashamed to be her Father
[Kneels by her
Tarp
Forgive me Sir, the scandal I have given
Both to my Parents, and my dearer Country
I am unworthy to be called a Roman
A Roman is no Traytor! A Roman's brave,
Just, true, and of a mind above Corruption
But I have been so false I cannot speak it
The Soul of my good name's long since expired,
And why shou'd I survive?
Sp. Tarp
True, true, my lovely Daughter! O thou art now
In this last ebb of life, more fair than ever
Others may think thy former beauty fadeing,
Languid, and dying-pale as a cropt Lilly;
To me the Roses of thy Cheeks still flourish,
Fresh as the blooming Spring, sweet as the East
These closing eyes are real Jewels now;
Poetick fury cannot make 'em brighter
Tar
O tell me, Sir, truly, as you are noble
Do not dissemble: Have I redeem'd my Crime,
And with my blood cleans'd the foul stains of Treason?
Sp. Tar
Believe me then,—
Thou art all white again, my dear Tarpeia;
This glorious Act restores thy innocence,
And from this hour, thou art new born to me
A spotless Roman Virgin
Tar
It is enough! Have I all this for dying?
O Glory cheaply bought! Come Death, come quickly;
Come thou, more lov'd than Curtius; haste to meet me
The grim Man hears me. See! he comes; I feel him
Farewel: I go in haste; with greater Joy,
Than love sick Virgins lose their name to Hymen
Farewel for ever
[Dyes
Sp. Tar
Farewel my shame, and glory!—
[Rising
Nature wou'd shew it self; it whispers me,
She was my Daughter; True, but she died bravely
I ought not then to shed one tear, but triumph
Take up the Body, Souldiers, as one of us;
For tho she were a Virgin, she was martial
Such Obsequies as are to Hero's given,
Shall be my Daughters: A Maid of manly courage
A Soul oppos'd to destiny: Her shame
Was Love and Life, Revenge and Death her fame
[Exeunt Omn
SCENE II. The Pallace
Portia, Cloe
Por
THis welcome news must sure restore her
Clo
I doubt it not at all: Her late sleep too contributes
Por
Where not you present, Cloe, when Cornelia
Made the Relation to her?
Clo
Yes
Port
How did she receive it?
Clo
As one of us would a surprizing Story,
When half a sleep: She started, blusht, then askt
A thousand little questions, to no purpose,
Then blush't again, and turn'd away her eyes,
As conscious and ashamed of her late weakness
Port
These simptoms shew returning sense, tho slowly,
And by degrees, as harmless. Virgins wake
From pleasing dreams.—
Enter Feliciana, Cornelia
Feli
O Portia! O my Cloe, witness all
What here Cornelia tells me. She sayes Hostilius,
She sayes my Sister, too? And not she only,
But Hostilius are coming hither.—
Port
It is most true
Feli
Go you wou'd all deceive me: You tell me Heaven
Will come to me, and all the upper world
Stoop to a silly Girl. Fie on you all!
How can I think it? Go, you are all deceivers
Cot
Look, Madam, trust your eyes.—
Enter Hersilia
Hersi
Feliciana! O my long-mist Dear
[Embracing
Feli
O my Sister!
Hersi
My haste to see my sweet Feliciana,
Transported me, and wou'd not let me rest,
Till thus I settle in her dear embrace.—
Why are you silent, sweetest! sure some vast joy
Stifles her words.—What does this mean, Cornelia?
Cor
O Madam, since you went, all her fair senses
Have been as absent, as your self, and her
Much loved Hostilius
Clo
No wonder then the way being thus disturb'd,
If her returning Wits appear to wander
Hersi
I'le guide e'm right, for I have joyes in store,
Great, as her past affectons. Come with me
[ to Fel
Sweet innocence! Fortune's not alwayes angry
She now is pleas'd again, and bids you too
Smilelike herself, the happy hour's arriv'd
The happy hour, that gives your Sister means
To pay what she has stood so long engag'd for
I'le make Hostilius yours: For I can give him
Fel
I dare not trust you
Her
You must: You shall this once, and never after
Hast, my Feliciana: Let us flie,
On the soft wings of Love, to meet Hostilius
[Exeunt omnes
SCENE III. A Garden
Enter Hostilius
THis is the place, and this the time appointed
As soon as I arriy'd back at the Pallace,—
These were her words.—I'le then and there said she
Confer the dear reward I mention.—
What can that be? but what, it shou'd not be
She knows, she knowes, I value no reward,
But only what, she shou'd not give, her Love
O Romulus! my friend! how can I think,
That name, and yet wait here for his dishonour.—
Yet I am innocent,—I'le back again
She is not here: Than why shou'd I expect,
And do so foul an action, in cold blood?
No, I will back again:—I cannot go
Methinks I shou'd attend a Ladies motion,
Much more a Queens, a Goddess, such as Hersilia
Deceitful Love! O thou false impostor!
O my my lost friendship! Lost! I will not lose it
But one turn more, and I will, will go
[Exit
Enter Hersilia, and speaks entring
Hers
Stand you all out of sight; there at that turning,
And when I call appear.—I see him yonder,
Pensive he walks, as if he fear'd to meet
What he expects. I know he thinks my Love,
The promised Recompence, for his past service,
I'le soon transfer his thoughts to the right object
He sees me
Enter Hostilius
Hers
Does not Hostilius wonder to what end
I meet him thus, and in a place so far
Removed from sight and interruption?
Host
Not at all, Madam: Hersilia cannot have
A thought unworthy of her self, and Honour
( Aside ) What a soft charming look has she put on?
Oh I am ruin'd!—
Hers
I told you Sir, I knew,
Of a reward that I am sure will please you
Tis Love, and such a Love you must not slight
Host
Ay: It is so: My fears, and my desires
Are joyn'd to make me wretched: I am lost
Lost past recovery
What Man can stand against such sweet temptation?
[Aside
Hers
'Tis from no Common beauty; but one adorn'd
With all the advantages of Birth and Fortune,
Young, witty, noble, innocent, and fair,
As the first smiles of Summer Mornings are
Chearful as April Suns, fresh as the Spring.—
Host
It must be she her self, the Character
Sutes with no other Woman.—
[Aside
Enter Romulus, ( unseen. )
Rom
Ha! my Hersilia, and Horsilius here
Alone too—
[Stands aside
Hers
Such is the Lady that has loved you long,
Hostilius: She has loved you to excess,
But hitherto unknown; her flame has lasted
Silent and to her self, as Lamps in Tombs.—
I am amaz'd to see you thus unmoved
Can you hear this Intelligence, from me too,
And give it no more welcome?
Rom
What do I hear? What, do I see? I will
Not trust my senses, they are all deceitful
No, in despight of my own eye and ear,
I'le observe on: Down, down, rebellious thought.—
'Tis false, Hersilia cannot wrong me
Host
These are too quick advances: And less than
Decent, Methinks, she's not so fair as lately
A Cloud is drawing o're her eye, I see it
Now love, where art thou? the Coward Boy's retiring
Honour I am all thine.—
[Aside
Madam, I must confess, it is a vast
Reward you offer for a little service
So vast, and so surprizing is the offer,
I scarce have sense enough left to refuse it
Had your words been less clear, I shou'd not then
Have dared to know their meaning; But now
They are so plain, I must not understand 'em
Hers
I am o'rejoy'd to find him answer thus
I see he thinks it is my Love I offer;
And by my conduct I have cur'd his phrenzy,
[Aside
Extinguisht all the Rebel flame for me,
And made him capable of a new passion
[Aside
—And can you then refuse the Love I bring you?
Can you, Hostilius, when Hersilia sayes
Love and be happy, slight the precious news?
How have I been deceiv'd? 'Twas falsly said,
Hostilius honour'd, loved, adored Hersilia,
Since she commends a Ladies Passion to him?
And yet Hostilius stands as unconcern'd
Rom
I'le hear no more: My patience is abused
False, False Hersilia
[ Rom. comes forward
Hers
My Lord, I have been making Love here.—
Rom
And can you own it too? But you 're already
Too much dissembled. O that I had died
By Tatius juster sentence; not lived to see
His Daughter, thus much worse than kill me
Hers
Nay, than 'tis time to disabuse you both—
Feliciana: Sister! Where are you?
Enter Feliciana and Attendants
Look, Hostilius —
This is the Lady, for whose sake I wo you
Has not my Character, short of her Beauty,
Wrong'd her, by an imperfect commendation?
Take her, brave Man, and here bestow that love,
Which err'd to me; nor was your Error lost,
When you imagin'd I could wrong my Lord
But in a thought: 'Twas all designed for this
Rom
How base do I appear! Poor, and unworthy;
And how divine Hersilia: yet I am pleased
Take from my Character ye Gods: Take, take,
Yet more, and add it all to hers; for she
Alone merits to be; nay is perfection
Let after Ages copy from Hersilia,
When they wou'd learn what's good, or chaste, or noble
But let the name of Romulus be odious,
Since he could wrong her love by base suspition
Can you forgive?—O I want assurance
To ask. So much injustice you ought not,
You must not pardon. Such a Crime as mine
Exceeds, if it were possible, your Goodness.—
Hers
O hold, or I shall doubt with better cause
Your love, than you did mine. Can Romulus
Be kind to me, and yet forbid my kindness?
You speak of pardon, where you ne're offended
My dearest Lord, I'm pleas'd at your suspicion
If (as th'appearance was) you had not been moved,
Sure you had loved me less
Rom
O wondrous goodness! Miracle of women
Can you still love me?
Hers
My life, I can, I doe!
[Embracing
Host
But, Madam, what must I return, for this dear blessing?
I'm so confounded with the mighty favour,
I know not where first to bestow my thanks;
To my sweet Mistress, here, who thought me worthy,
Or to your self, who form'd my erring heart,
For such a Heaven,
Hers
Pay 'em to her: Only her love deserves them
See, Sir, her blushes keep her speechless; but
That very silence tells you, she merits more
Than you can pay her.—
Enter a Soldier
Sol
To, Armes, to Armes: O! quick, or Rome is lost
The Sabines enter at Port Ianualis
Led on by Tatius: Curtius too half desperate,
Since his late loss, fights now with double Courage
The Guards give ground apace, and they are neer
Possest of all that Quarter
Row
A truce with Love Hostilius, we are call'd
To bolder actions.—
Host
—Were all their Army present
I have no power to stir, till thus I pay,
At this soft shrine of Love and innocence
My first Devotions
[ Kisses Feliciana's hand
From this dear touch, I take new life, new Love,
And thus inspir'd to certain conquest move
[ Ex. Rom. Host
Feli
He's gone: while he was here I had no power
To speak, to move, or any thing but blush
My overflowing joy met every thought,
And choak'd my words e're they could reach my tongue
My fears, my fears, now give me Elocution
O I shall lose your Present Sister. In vain,
You gave me the brave Man: The cruel Sabines
Will rob me of Hostilius
Hers
Why shou'd you fear
Success? have not I made a greater venture,
My Soul, my Romulus, my All I hazard
In this ingagement.—But if I hazard all
Why stand I here? Can I be safe, when he,
My better self's in danger? Cloe, run,
Gather the Sabine Women in a body
Bid 'em all meet with speed at Iuno's Temple.—
Feli
What means my Sister?
[ Exit Cloe
Her
I feel unusual joy shoot through my heart
Something within me whispers, that as I
First caused this war, so it is I must end it
Swell noble thought, That I may something do
Worthy a Roman Wife, and Sabine Daughter
Enter Portia
Port
Be happy Madam: Heaven declares for Rome
The Gods fight for us. When your Romulus
Found his men flying, and that no perswasions,
Nor threats, nor his example cou'd prevail,
To stay the Coward Fugitives, to all
His friends above, the pious Roman calls,
And vows a Temple in the place to Iove
Behold a Miracle! they, who but now
Fled as so many Hares, turn on the sudden.—
Hers
I'm seised with joy and wonder
Port
But this is, Madam, wonderful indeed
While the prevailing Sabines bore all before 'em,
Pursuing fiercely along by Ianus Temple,
A stream of Sulphur flow'd more fiercely on 'em,
From the offended God: Drowning and burning them,
But giving us more time and means to rally
Hers
Shall the two ever jarring Elements
Of Fire and Water, lay by their enmity,
Uniting both their powers for Rome, while I,
The Wife of Romulus, stand unconcern'd?
No, I will lose my Nature too; cast off
The fears of Woman, and with a Troop
Of my own Sex, confront the thickest danger
But stay you here, my sweet Feliciana,
Thy years are much unfit for such a hazard
Fel
Unkind Hersilia! Why shou'd you under-rate
My love, and think it less than yours?
Young as I am, I dare as much as you
For love and my Hostilius, I am all fire
And yet I durst not go, were not he there;
But to meet him, tho in a Grave, I dare
[Exeunt omnes
SCENE Ult. The Scene draws, and discovers the Romans and Sabines ready to engage. Drums and Trumpets
Romulus, Hostilius, Tatius and Curtius come forward
Tat
Forbear a while.—Since, Romulus, we meet
So opportunely, let us two, who have
The chief concern in this unhappy War,
Decide the quarrel singly. Why shou'd we
Profusely cast away a thousand lives
Harmless and unconcern'd? when we may better
Stake all th'event of war on our own heads
Rom
The offer's just and noble: I accept it
Tat
Give your command then, to your Roman party,
As I to mine (who I 'm sure will obey me)
That they remain spectators only, and
Both sides yeild to him that conquers
Host
Sure Tatius, never heard Hostilius named
Am I soe great a stranger, to your ear?
Or has report, ne're mentioned the strict friendship
With which the God like Romulus has graced me
'Tis time you know it now, if yet you have not
I cannot see my King engaged,
And I unactive.—
Cur
—Nor I my General
Once more, Hostilius, fortune presents my sword
To oppose yours; sure now we may decide
What late we left imperfect
Host
With as much joy as absent Lovers meet
Tarp
Is there not yet one Sabine more that dare
Contest with me the Justice of this War?
Must I be so unhappy to stand idle,
A poor Spectator of brave deeds, and want
One noble Enemy among so many?
[Two or three Sabines are coming forward io answer
Tat
Retire and keep your places.—You see Tarpeius
Here are enow, that strive for the like honour;
But since your King agrees to fight me single,
I'le have no more engaged than are already
Hostilius has indeed put in no common claim
Or else he too had been refused
Rom
Be not displeased, thou brave and worthy Roman
'Tis sit I leave one friend alive, to tell
[ Embracing Tarp
Posterity, how much I die Hersilia's
How much my heart abhorr'd to live,
Unless in her: How my last sillable was her's,
And how my Soul flew in a trembling sigh
Up with her name to Heaven
[Tarp. retires
Tat
We lose too many minutes; Roman advance,
And meet me as a Foe implacable
Respect me not, as Father to Hersilia,
Rather than so, I cancel all Relation,
Quit my Alliance, and disown my blood
[They all pass
Enter Hersilia, Feliciana, and other Women, who all run in between 'em
Hers
Do,—kill us first, and then your selves. Add this
To the great List of all your Glorious Acts,
That you have Murdered all these unarm'd Women
Where am I now arriv'd? Is that my Father?
He is or shou'd be: This I'me sure's my Husband.—
Feli
And this to me more dear, than thousand Husbands
I'le be Hostilius shield, weak as I am,
He that wounds him must do it through my breast
Hers
Sir,
[ To Tatius Kneeling
Tat
Woman away
Hers
Have I no nearer Name?
Tat
Hersilia,—
Hers
Still that has too much distance: methinks
I hear my Mothers Soul, from her blest seat
Of rest, call out and say, I am your Daughter
Tat
You were; till disobedient Love blotted that name,
And render'd all my blood degenerate,
Hers
—My Lord,—
[ To Romulus
Rom
My better life! Retire Hersilia
[Raising her
O do not thus expose to the blind Sword,
A life inestimable: To see you bleed
Wou'd kill my very Soul. Shou'd I lose you
I lose a thousand lives, a thousand worlds
Hers
Perish a thousand Worlds, before I see
My Father kill my Husband; He my Father
You both devide my Duty: I live in both,
And die in either: why shou'd you then endeavor?
To murder me twice over in your selves
I had rather once in my own person die
Than twice in yours: Begin, begin with me
Take my life he that pleases; take it freely
But spare each other.—
Tat
These, Romulus, are your security
I'le draw my Party off; some other time
We'll find an hour more masculine and noble,
When we may act like men, not talk to women
Hers
O stay; for to part thus has something in't
Worse than my present fears. O hear me Sabines!
Hear me you noble Romans! If for my sake
This war was first begun, why for my sake
May it not now be ended? Am I Hersilia?
Have I a Father and a Husband here,
And yet want interest to mediate with you?
Sure Nature cannot be so far defective;
I know my Father cannot be obdurate;
I know it by my self; if he were cruel
I could not be compassionate and kind
No, he was never cruel; 'twas but dissimulation
When lately he condemn'd my Lord and I
Tat
Thus far 'tis true, tho I condemn'd you justly,
I never meant the threatned Execution
Curtius knows it,—
But what is that to this? We now meet equal,
And I to vindicate my Right, and Honour
Hersilia, give us way; when Kings dispute,
Swords are their Arguments, Force their perswasion
Hers
No, make your way to him through me.—Yet hold,
Your Sword is needless, I feel a sharper weapon;
The thought of your unkindness kills me surer
[Faints
Rom
O stay fair Soul! If but one minute longer,
Stay but to take me with you—No, she's gone!
Look back Hersilia, I shall soon o're take you
[Offers to fall on his Sword. Hostilius holds him. Hersilia recovers
Hers
What pleasing voice unkindly calls me back
From the eternal rest of injur'd Lovers?
Sure 'tis my Lord; it must, it must be he;
No Tongue but his can draw Souls from Heaven
[ Embracing Rom
Tat
I am o'recome. He that can see such Love
And yet not melt, is not a Man but Devil
I yield, O Divine power of Love,
That can subdue a fury such as mine!
[He Embraces Romulus and Hersilia
Be happy in each other, best of Lovers,
My Daughter, and my Son! I'm doubly blest;
Since now in knowing you, I know my blessing.—
Sheath all your Swords: give the Command abroad,
That like me, each embrace his Enemy
[Curtius and Hostilius Embrace, and c
Hers
O happy change,
Rom
Blest be Hersilia, ever!
Since to her Piety we owe this change
Never was War so ended!
Host
Yet one more blessing, Sir, and we are all happy
[ To Tat
[ Approaching with Feliciana
Our hearts are both united: We only want
Your favour to compleat a Glorious Hymen
Tat
This is my second comfort. Take her Hostilius,
For you deserve her. Thou second Romulus!
Live, Love, and be as happy as the first
Cur
Tarpeius you alone know my dishonour
[ Aside to Tarp
My false, base, Treason, and the Love that caused it
My mind is now reform'd: I am no more,
Rival to Romulus, but his admirer
When I behold his flame my own expires,
As brighter Suns put out the lesser fires
As you are Noble, then conceal my shame,
For I repent it much.—
And I am now prepar'd by future kindness
To pay off all that mighty Debt of Love,
Which I have too long ow'd to your much injured Daughter
Sp. Tarp
Your Debts discharged, Sabinus, and hers already paid
To Nature: Tarpeia is no more
Cur
Tarpeia dead? Forbid it Heaven!
Sp. Tarp
Unable to endure the sense of such dishonour
As her unhappy Love contracted, by her own hand
She washt the spots of Fame in her own blood
Cur
Ah Noble Maid! too brave, and too unhappy!
Heroes and Demy-Gods shall Celebrate Tarpeia
Queens when they'd Name a Maid of mighty Courage,
And vindicate their Sex above the Male,
Will say Tarpeia: But most the hapless Lover,
When he complains of Cross and Cruel Stars,
Shall weeping mention her sad fate and call it his
Sp. Tarp
Curtius no more: Let us forget our sorrows
We injure much our Countries publick Joy
No Passion now shou'd Raign, but Love and Triumph
Tat
Romans and Sabines are no longer two,
But the same Nation, now: Where such a Love
Has shew'd the way to Rome, we must all follow
Rom
Renown'd for ever be this day and place
Here for all Ages, let the Roman Tribes,
Fix their Comitium, for more solemn meetings
Here every year let all the blooming Youth,
And tender Virgins, of our now own people,
In Songs and Revels Celebrate this day
And as a Monument of the late wonder,
Let Ianus Temple, ever open stand
When Rome has War, the God for us will fally
Happy the Nuptials, when two Kingdomes Wed
Empire and Crowns spring from that Marriage Bed
FINIS
EPILOGUE Writ By Mrs. A. Behn
Spoken by Tarpeia
FAir Ladies, pitty an unhappy Maid,
By Fortune, and by faithless Love betray'd
Innocent once — I scarce knew how to sin,
Till that unlucky Devil entring in,
Did all my Honour, all my Faith undo
Love! like Ambition, makes us Rebels too
And of all Treasons, mine was most accurst;
Rebelling 'gainst a King and Father first
A Sin, which Heav'n nor Man can e're forgive;
Nor could I Act it with the face to live
My Dagger did my Honours cause redress;
But oh! my blushing Ghost must needs confess,
Had my young Charming Lover faithful been,
I fear I'd dy'd with unrepented Sin
There's nothing can my Reputation save
With all the True, the Loyal and the Brave;
Not my Remorse, or Death, can expiate
With them a Treason 'gainst the KING and State
Some Love-sick Maid perhaps, now I am gone,
(Raging with Love, and by that Love undone;)
May form some little Argument for me,
T' excuse m' Ingratitude and Treachery
Some of the Sparks too, that infect the Pit,
(Whose Honesty is equal to their Wit,
And think Rebellion but a petty Crime,
Can turn to all sides Int'rest does incline,)
May cry "I gad I think the Wench is wise;
"Had it prov'd Lucky, twas, the way to rise
"She had a Roman Spirit, that disdains
"Dull Loyalty, and the yoke of Sovereigns
"A Pox of Fathers, and Reproach to come;
"She was the first and Noblest Whig of Rome
But may that Ghost in quiet never rest,
Who thinks it self with Traytors Praises blest
FINIS
