Requested Title: SIR COUR TL y NICE
Authors: John Crowne
Matched Alias: Sir Courtly Nice
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_sir-courtly-nice-_crowne-john_1693
Source Title: Sir Courtly Nice: ...  1693
Source Author: Crowne, John.
Source Date: 1693
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/sir_courtly_nice_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from validated standalone Internet Archive OCR with a clear title page and dramatis personae.

---
COMEDY:
As it is Acted by His MAJaSTIES
| Servants. The Second Ed:'tion,
Written by My, Crown.
=
LONDON,
Printed by MM. B. for R. Bently, in Ruſſel-f cet, Covent-Garden, and Joſ.: Hindmarſh , at the Golden-Ball over a ainſt the _ Ez. change in Cornhill, M.DC. XClI
The Names of the Perſons,
] » 4 Belguard. Sth Vie Brother, in love
Sir Courtly Nice.
Farewel.
Surly. Crack, Hitbead. Teſtimony.
Violante,
Leonora, | d
Aunt .
with Vulante,
A Fop, overcurious in his Diet and Dreſs : In love with Leonora.
A young Man of Quality and For- _—_ his Rival. |
A moroſe, ill natur'd, negligent Fellow, in love with V7olante,
A young ſubtle intriguing Fellow.
3h cholerick Zealot againſt Fana=- ticks. Tn ”
A Canting Hypocritical Fanatick. -
So Lady of Quality and Fortune, v
in love with Belguard,
Belguard's Siſter, in love with Farewel,
Eeonora's Governeſs— an old A-. morous, enyyous Maid,
Scene Covent-Carden,
I
( 24+ Je 45 8 pes noer
To his Grace the Duke of ORM OND, Lord
Steward of His Majeflies Houſhold, Chancel-
lor of the Univerſuy of Oxford, Knight of ©
the Moſt Noble Order of the Garter, &c.
Aay it pleaſe your Grace,
His Comedy was Written by the Sacred Command of our late maſt
Excellent King, of ever bleſſed and beloved Memory. I had the great
good Fortune to pleaſe Him often at His Court in my Maſque, on the
Stage in Tragedies and Comedies, and ſo to advance my ſelf in his
good opinion; an Honour may render a wiſer Man than I vain , for I believe he had more <quals in extent of Dominions, than of Underſt nding. The great- eft pleaſure he had from the Stige was in Comedy, and he « fren Commanded meto Write it,and lately gave me a Spaniſh Play cali'd No Puedeſer: Or, It cannot Be. out of which 1 tock part o? theName, and deſign o* this. I receiv'd the Employ- ment as a great Honour, becauſe it was difficult z requiring no ordinary sill and Pains to build a little Shallop, fit only for the Spaniſh South. Seas, into an Engliſh Ship Royal ; bur I believe my ſelfable for th2 Work, becauſe he thought ſo, who nnderſtood m- and all Men, better than I only knew my ſelf, encourag'd by a Roy- al judgment that never was miſtaken, 1 have attained a ſucceſs I never ſhould have met with, had I only foilowed my own feeble Genius, which often deceives, me. That 1 may enjoy the little fortune I have got with the better reputation and not ramble the World like a bold outlaw, obſerving none but my (elf, I make this humble Application to your Grace. I am ſure all the World will ap- prove my choice. I cannot be guilty of Flattery if I would; nor flander Wit ( if I had any ) by fulſome and wanton Paintings. Here will be no Tryal of skill how 1 can praiſe, Nature has done it to my Hands, and devyis'd and expos'd finer Ideas, than I am able to Tranſlate. A gracefulneſs of Perſon, excellence of Un- derſtanding, largeneſs of Heart, a Loyalty, Gallantry, Integrity, Humility, and many Qualities above my deſcription. Fortune alſo has been more wiſe than uſual, ſhe fi equently honours and enriches others to her own diſgrace—but here She ſhares in the Praiſe, and Commends her own Wiſdom, in what She beſtows on your Grace. She has advanc'd Honour in Advancing yon, Titles,Greatneſs and Command may be proud, they have attained you. Wealth has a value in your Hands. *Tis no vile pardon, poor flatterer, ſervile Lackquey wretched Priſoner;
| but excellent Miniſter of a jaſt wiſe and liberal Prince. ſhou'd I mention all the
Qualities, that have long gained you the higheſt Honours from Prince and Peo- ple, I ſhould rather ſeem to deſcribe a Province then a Man ;-for what ſingle Pro- vince can afford what are at once in yoyr Grace, a General, a Stateſman, a Cour- tier, andall in perfeQion ; and which is rare in ſuch company, « Martyr. What
has your Grace both done and ſuffered, for our Religion, Laws, © Liberties and
Honour ? And not only in the former times of Rebellion, but the latter of Con-
fuſion ? When the pretended Proteſtants of the times, out of their Zeal againſt af
Popiſh Doctrines, abhor'd you for adhering to good Works, =— LR | A2 AS
*
Ws EEE ELLA A es ie EC, Ul ei Ale A.
a 5
The Epiſtle edicatory.
As an Fnglifh-man, Tam bound in juſtice, to. pay you all tne Honours I can. You have been an Ornament, and ſupport to the Crown and Churcn of England, both in your Perſon and Poſterity. Many great Men no doubt have ſprung from your example, bnt none cqualling thoſe deſcended from your ſelf. The late brave Earl of Ofery, advanced the Honour of our Nation, bath by Sea and Lind. ?tis hard to fay in which Element he made us molt renown'd, and for vihich Virtue. He was no more to be vanquiſhed by falſhood than fear ; Loy- 21ty, Fidelity, and Gallantry, are Virtues inſeperable from the Houſe of Ormond; we find e?m in every branch of it, and at all ſeaſons. Tae Earl of Arran, At- tacked in the lite days of Confuſion, a Bloody, Popular, and Formidable Error in its Camp, Fortified and Detended by all the ſtrength of England; and for ever ſecur?d his own, and ſo much of the Pudblick reputation as was entruſtet to him; managing that charge with the ſame Wiſdom, Jultice, and Ficelity he has done the Kingdom of Jreland, and many other grezt Commands, for the Honour ard Service of the King. In the-Yeung Earl of Of:ry we have great aſſurances, the Grandfather and Father ſhall live in him, and receive the laſt rewards of Yi:tue Men are capable - f in this World, to hive thew Hononr and Happinei; extend beyond thiir own »ings. And herein” the Hiltory of your Grace ſeems'a Conment on tt} Fifrn Commandment, you huve aiwvays Honoured the Father of your Conntry, and your, Days of Honour cont ne Jong in the Land, in your own P<ilon, and your Illulti:zous Race, A uictul Prelident to England. | - That I may approve my ſelf an honeſt and grateful Engliſh-man, is cne rea-
'ſon' of my Addreſs :* I have alſo other obligations on me. Your-Grace has
been a Princely patron and encourager of Poetry ; a Pleaſant but Barren Coun- try where my Genius and Inclination has caſt me. Tamentanglied among the inclinations of it, though ir affords nething but a good Ayre, a little vain Re- putation, and we muſt climb for it, and ſhall miſs it too, if envy or 11] nature can hinder us. There were no living, if ſome great Men elevated not only in Quality but underſtanding above the reſt of the World, did not Prote& us from theſe Barbarians, becauſe they know us. I beſcech your Grace thengive me leave to pay my Duty to you. Many and great are your Revenues in Honour, in the Camp, the Court, the Church, and the whole Common-wealth of Learning. I mc P02t may be employed as well as the Hiſtorian. I have made but a ſmall Colle&ion, but I have put it in vands that I hope will not foon embezle it. Fhis Comedy bas rais'd ic-ſelf ſucha fortune in the World, I believe it will not ſoon run 2way. Gave it leave to Honour it ſelf with your great Name, and me
with the Title of,
. * *
ay it pleaſe your Grace, Tour Graces moſt Humble and Obedient Servant,
John Crown.. The *
The Prologue.
Hat are the Chaxmes, by which theſe happy \ V ( lſles —
Hence gain'd Heaven's brighteſt and eternal | (miles ? What Nation upon Earth beſides our own,
\ But by a loſs like ours had been undone 2
Ten Ages ſcarce ſuch Royal worths diſplay. As England loſt, and found in one ſtrange Day.. One hoar in ſorrow and confuſion harld, And yet the next the envy of the World.
N-y.we are bleft, 15 {oite of us 'tis known,
Heavens choice for Us w.s better than our own. To ſtop the bleſſings that oreflow this day, What heaps o' Rogues we pild up in the way ? We choſe fit tooles againſt all good to ftrive; . The ſawcieſt, lewdeſt, Proteſtants alive. They wou'd have form'd a bleſſed Church indeed, Upon a Turn coate DoCtor's lying Creed. To know if e're he took- Degree 1s hard,
"Tis thought he'l have on in the Palace Yard, Plot ſwallowers ſure will Drink no more ſtuff down, | From that foul Pitcher when his Ears are gone.
Let us rely on Conlcience, not on Cheats,
On Fleavens wiſdom, not on Juglers feats. How greatly Heaven has our great loſs ſupplyed ? *Ts no {mall Vertue heales a Wound ſo wide:
Nay
—
The P rologue.
Nay in fo little time to reer our Head, To our own wonder, and our Neighbours dread.
They fee that Valour Crown'd with regal Power,
"They oft have ſeen what Lawrels Crown'd before.
Verle is too narrow for {o Great a Name,
Far ſounding Seas hourly repeat His Fame.
Our Neighbours vanquiſh'd Fleets ofc wafted o're,
His Name to theirs and many a trembling Shore ;
And we may go by His great Conduft led
As far in Fame as our Foretathers did.
At home he milder ways to Glory choſe, |
God like, by Patience he ſubdued his Foes ; | ,. 4 Now they and their deſigns are Ruined all, Beneath their fallen, accurſt, Excluding Wall, | Theſe are not all the bleſſings of this Iſle,
Heaven on our Nation in a Queen does ſmile. Whoſe Vertue's Grace by Beauty ſhine ſo bright, 2 All the Fair Sex to Vertue Shel invite ; ; | And all the Clouds turn to a glorious Day, | |
By that Illuſtrious paire's united ray, Who both Reform and Grace Us by their ſway.
Epilogue. |
| Exati at Nine, hard by o're Chocolate,
Epilogue.
; Is a hard Caſe, an Audience now to pleaſe, | For every Pallat's ſpoy' ld with ſome Diſeaſe. Poor Plays as faſt as Women now decay, = They'r ſeldom car'd for after the firſt day ; How often have I heard true wit call'd ſtuff, By Men with nothing in their Brains but Snuff ? Each Shante Spark, that can the Faſhion hut, | Place bis Hat thus, role full Forſonbs @ Wit; C | And thinks his Cloaths allows him judge of " 8
The City Gallant, the Exchange being done, 2 1 akes Sword at Cerple-Bar which Nice ſtuck on. c Comes here and paſſes for a Beaugarzoon. | Audacious Vizards too, ſo faſt do grow,
You hardly can the Virtuous from *em know,
Nay Parents now not likely can endure,
Their Childrens fanlts, but what is worſe procure, .
* Of Old the Mother full of Parent ſway,
Kept Miſs a4 Vaſſal fo- ber work all day 5
And to the Wooing Spark Miſs was not brought, But - ſome fine Colter thing her wheedle wrought *: Now you ſhall meet young Lady and her Mother, Rambling in Hackny-Coches maſqu't together ;
Yes, and to ſay the truth, to work they go, Fine work but
ſuch as they- mill never ſhew- Unleſs ſome Nott to draw a Fol to Wed,
And! then he finds Miſs rare at work a Bed..
But the. Grand Randewouz is kept of late,
Sad '
j-0 EF pilogue. Sad fate, that all th? Chriftian Youth oth Nation Should be oblig'd to Jews for Procreation, Nay; what. is worſe, that's, if reports be tre, Many a Chriſtian Gallant there turns Jew; _ That is, ſo oft ſome rotten Strumpet plyes him, The Chirurgion's forc't at laſt to Circumeiſe him, Our Bridges-ltreet i5 grown a Strumpet Fair, Where higiing Bawds do Palmb their rotten Ware. ' There Fowler like the watching Gallant Pores Behind his Glove, to ger a thot at Whores ; And from his tongue lets flye ſuch charming Words, That ſtrait be carries off the wounded Birds. Another waits above in the great Room, Till a new Cargozoon of Strumpets come. .. There by three Glaſſes plac't the Aﬀetted Dunce, Aﬀs you Four Courtly-Nices all af once ; | Our Gall:rys too, were finely usd of late, Where rooting Maſques ſat cackling for a Mate, They came not to ſee Plays but act their.own, And had throng'd Audiences when we bad none. Our Plays it was impoſſivie to hear, The honeſt Country Men were forc't to ſwear: Confound you, give your bawdy prating ore, Or Zeands,Þle fling you i the Pit, you bawling Whore- This Comedy throws all that Iewaneſs down, For Virtnous Liberty is pleas'd alone : 6 Promotes the Stage toth ends at firſt deſigw'd, As well ro profit, as delight the Mind. I
2
—_— —_—
«ies es neon. > TIES." 2.
A COMEDY Call'd Sir Courtly Nice :
It Cannot Be. TY,
Acrt I.
Enter at ſeveral Doors Leonora and Violante: Scene, Lord Bellguard's Houſe.
Leo. Y Dear — ( they embrace ) Vio. Ny Dear, how is it with thee? What amendment - in thy: Brothers humour, and thy condition ? Leo. None.
Vjio. Oh ! thou break?*ſt my heart, for I love him extreamly, and am, I think, as well belov'd by him z but whilſt he has this Diſeaſe upon him ſo mortal to Li- berty, dare venture on him no more, than if he had the Plague, or any other | Diſtemper dangerous to - Life. For what is life without Liberty ? To be his Wife is worſe than to be a Ghoſt, for that walks and enjoys a little chat ſome- times, but | muſt be laid by a Conjurer call'd a- Husband for my whole lite, I would not be a Queen on the tearms; no nor on any tearms, becauſe a Queen is confin'd to Forms, ſo fond am I of Liberty ; but next to that I love your, .
Brother ; I wou'd give all the World to cure him, is there no way ? 4
Lco. None that 1 know off. 4 , Vid. Muſt: Y
2 Sir Courtly Nice : - Vio. Muſt we then be for ever unhappy, I in the loſs of him,and you 1n Eternal Slavery ?
Zeo. I might have Liberty, but on ſuch tearms— YVio. What Tearms ? | : | - Leo. Marriage with ſach a Coxcomb, you know him— Sir Corrtly Nice, Vio. A tempting Man, he has a vaſt eſtate. Leo. -But incumber'd. Vio. With what ? EE Leo. A Fop, *tis morgag'd to a thouſand expenſive Follies, if it were not, 1 wou'd not drink water for the fake ofa fine Bowl chain d to the Weil. The Youth I love has a fair and free Eſtate. Yio. Mr.” Farewe! is it not ? Leo. The ſame. | Vio. Ay, but he's forbidden Fruit.” 4 Leo. I know. it to my forrow. | Vio. What's the reaſon ? | Leo. Hiſtory muſt tell you. There has becn a pique between our Families fince the Conqueſt ; none were thought truly of our Blood, that had not that Scurvy in it 3 becauſe mine began to ſwecten, my Father almoſt ſuſpected my Legitimacy ; and left me no Fortune but on condition I retaia'd the Ancient mark of our Houſe. Yio. There ariſes then your Brothers great Authority. He has the diſpoſal of your Fortune, by conſequence of you: Perſon ; Fortune is all Men ſeck
naw. They are io cow'd from Marriage, they will go Voluntiers into a Bat=..
le but muſt be preſt to marriage ; and *ts the Shilling docs it, Leo. Too true, But I believe Mr. Farewel of a raore generous temper, he ad- dreſſes ſtill. | ' Vio. It may be he does not know how it is with you, you have the Fame of Ten thouſand povnd, Lev. And the Money too, if I M:rry with my Brothers conſent, not elſe. Vis. That's hard, but Mt. Farewel has enough for you both.
Leo. Ay, if he will venture on me; yet if he will I know not how to comeat him, .
{am ſo watch'd, not only at home but abroad. I never ſtir out but as they ſay the Devil does, with Chains and Torments. She that is my Hell at home, is ſo abroad.
Fio. A new Woman.
Leo. Mo, an old Woman. or rather an old Devil ; nay worſe than an- old Devil, an old Maid.
Yu. Oh! there's no Fiend ſo envious,
 £Ze9. Right, ſhe will no more lzt roung Pcop be ſav'd, out of envy to their happineſs.
Vis. Who is ſhe ? | .
Z:0. One of my own Biood, an Aunt.
Vie. Tknow hcr,ſhe of thy Bloud ? ſhe has not nad a drop of it, theſe Twents. Tears ; the Devil of envy ſack'd it all out, and lefr ver;uice in the roome.
Leo, Tree, this Aunt hangs on. me like a daily Ague; butl had rather en- ure her, then be cur*d by ſuch a nonſenſical Charm as Sr. Conrtly is. And ng&- thing elſe can be applyed to me; for to afliſt my governing Aunt, there is a whole Army of Spies in the Houſe; ard over them two Spies General ; And. are my Brother thinks he ſhews. a. Maſter-picce of Policy... 77.
. « x94 ! he) le fin, than the Devil vial xt cm.
"Poa wv
|
_—
Or, it catinot Be, 3
Vio. Why ? what are they ? 1: a
2.co. Two, that will agree in nothing but one anothers confuſion. The one is a poor Kinsman of ours, ſo fierce an Enemy to Fanaticks, that he cou'd ear, no other meat; and he need no other Fire than himſelf to roaſt *em, for
lies always in a flame when he comes near *em, his Name- 1s Hot-head,
Yi», And I warrant thee the other 1s a Fanatick.
Leo. Oh! a moſt Zealous Scrupulous one ; with a conſcience ſwadled ſo hard in its Infancy by ſtrict Education, and now Thump'd and Cudgel'd fo fore with daily Sermons and Lectures, that the weak ricketty thing can endure nothing.
F.o Certainly theſe two, muſt make you ſport.
Leo. Oh ! their faces,Dreſles, Names are jeſts. The Fanatick's Name's Teſtimony.
Where is my Lord ? Where's my Lord ? Hot-head
Leo Oh ! 1 hear my Cholerick Couſin Hot-head,. within.
Enter Hot-head.
Hot. Where's my Lord ? Where's my Lord, I ſay ?
Lco. What won'd you do with my Lord ?
Hot. Call him to an account if he were not my Couſin, cut his pate, it may be Cudgel him. Heaven be thank'd to Cndgel a Lord is 10 Scardalum Maguatum.
Leo. What's .he reaſon of all this anger ! |
Hot. He affronr's me, he invites me to live iu his kouſe, and then keeps a Fanatick to make a jeſt o! me. He knows I ſweat when I ſee one.
Lco, May be he las occaſion for one.
Hot. What occaſion ? He is not in a Plot, is he ? Fanaticks are good for nothing elſe that I know of.
Leo. Why not ? Toads are good for ſomething.
Het. Ay, when they are hang'd and dryed, ſo is no Fanatick. He is ſuch a canker'd Rogue, he does miſchief whei he's hang'd ; let him ſpread Ink up- 0a Paper and it raiſes bliſters. — Bur here tlie Rogue 1s.
Fl Enter Teſtimony. Sirrah ! Sirrah, What's your buſineſs in this Houſe, Sirrah ?
Teſt. What Authority hve you to examine me, Friend ?
Hot. Friend, you Dog ! call me Friend, I'le knock you down Sirrah.
Teſt. Poor Soul -— poor Soul——
Het. You arean Impudent Raſcal to call the poor Soul— Sirrah, I havea Loy- alty and a good Conſcience, and that's a better Eſtate, than any of your Party have ; and if you live it; the Houſe with me, Ile ſettle it on you with a Pox to you.
Teſt. Yes, Mr. Hot-Fcad I know you well enough, I know yon would hang us all if you could.
Hot. 1 need not Sirrah, for Heaven be prais'd now you begin to hang your ſelves ; I knew when Tybarz was beſtow'd upon the Prieſts and Jeſuits, the Fanaticks and: Re-publicans wou'd not long be without ir, for they are very fond of all Church Lards, come, Sirrah, if you live here, le make you turn over a new leaf, Ile make you go to Church, Sirrah.
GG ” That's more then you do your ſelf Mr. Hor-head, you go not often to urch.
Hot. What then'?..Pm for the Church, Sirrah. But you are againſt the Church, and againſt the Miniſters, Sirrat. | 7
5S- B 2 Teſt 4
© III Is» Ge” - A
Fl Sir Courtly- Nice :
Teſt. I cannot be Edifyed by %m, they are ſorma), weak, iznorant, n Souls— Lord help *tem — poor Souls. F ; ths IG
Hot. Ignorant ? yowre an impudent Raſcal to call Men o? their Learning Ig- norant ; there's not one in a hundred of %em, but has taken all his Degrees at Oxford, and is a Dottor, you Sot you.
Teſt, What ſignifies Oxford? can't we be ſfav'd unleſs we go to Orford ?
Hot. Oxford don't lye cut o? the road to Heaven 3 you Afs. ;
Teft. Pray what do they learn at Oxford? only to ſtudy Heathens ; they * talk of Ariſictle in the publick, they may be aſham'd to name 2riol; amons? civil People. us
Hort. Oh! you Sot.
Teft. Our Miniſters are powerful Men. Oh ! Forſooth I wiſh yen © to Leo. were under one of our Miniſters; you wou'd find they wou'd pierce you for- ſooth ; they wou'd go to your inward parts.
Hot. This Rogue is talking Bawdy.
Teft. They would ſhew you the great — great ſinfulneſs of ſin, that fin is one of the ſinfulleſt things in the whole World.
Hot. You ſenceleſs Raſcal, what ſhoyid be ſinful but fin ? what ſhould bo
fooliſh but a Fool ? |
Leo. Are not theſe a ridiculous Co1ple ?
Teſt. come this is very provoking, and very projhane ; I ſhall have a £:4 time on't in this wicked Family.
Hot. Wicked | Sirrah: What wickedneſs. do you ſec in this Family ?
Leo. Ay, Mr. Teſtimony, now we are all concern'd, what Vices do you find among us ?
Teſt. Suppoſe 1' ſee not many Vices, morality: 1s not the thing ;. the Heathens tad morality, and forſovoth would you have your Coachman or your Footmen to be no better Men than Sexeca *
Hot. A Coachman a better Man then Sexeca ?
Leo. I wou'd have him be a better Coachman than I believe Sencca was...
Teft. Ay, and a better Chriſtian too, or woe be to him. But truly ] ſee sreat wantonneſs even 1n your ſelf forſooth,— the very Cook debauches you.—
| Hot. How ? call the Cook ! — Cook ! — Cook! —
Leo. The Cook debiuch me, Sirrah ?
Teſt. I mean- by pampring you, Morning, Noon, and Night with one wantog kickſhaw or another. — |
Yio. You Coxcomb.
Leo. Sot.
EHht. Raſc1l, I thought the Cook had layn with my Coulin— Sirrah, you deſerve to have your bones broke. Well Sirrah,fince you find my Lords Table is too luſt y,
He have it guelded ; I'le make you keep Lerr, and faſt Wedneſdays and Frydays,
Tejh. I will not, I abhor it, "tis Popery. Hot. Then you ſhall faſt Tueſdays and Thurſdays. Teſt. And then the Fimily will ſlander me, and. ay I.do it-out. o* contradicti-
on,— 1 willnot do it, I do not love 'to grieve the weak.
by
Her. 'Fo grieve the ſtrong thou mean'ſt, thy ownſtrong ſtomack. Teſt, Yoy are offeadive.
Hot. k
_ , a. 0 vo -o
po. ,
Or, it cannot Be, | 5
Hot. 1 will be more. I will watch you Sirrah, and know why my Lord feeds fuch Raſcals.
Teſt. I tarry not for his feeding, the Family is a ſad Family, and l tarry out of pure Bowels. 7
Hot. Out of empty Bowels, which you have a mind to fill, and it may be you may fiil other empty bellys, I mcan among the Wenches, ſome of you Godly Rogues piay ſuch tricks ſome times. I'le watch you Sirrah. [ Exit.
Teſt, And Ile watch you, my Spirit riſes at this Man exceedingly. [| Exit.
Vio. Theſe are a pleaſant Couple. |
Leo. Is not my Brother politick ? Theſe are to ſee no Proviſions for wantonneſs be conveigh'd to me from abroad, and be {ure they will not agree to deceive him. And that 1 may have none at home, My Brother will not venture a handſome Ser- vant in the houſe; he ſwears he will not be Brother in Law to er'e a Butler or l Footman in Ergl-d; and he has cull'd for his Family, the moſt choice pieces of I cleformity he cou'd find in the Natinn. I bclieve they are now altogether in the
; Pantry, and my Aunt among *%*m diltribatins: their Breakfaſts— the Monſters will be worth ſeecing— open the Door.— The Scene 1s drawn, and a Company. of Crooked, Wither'd, ul look'd Fellows are at breakfaſt, and Aunt with them.
Aunt. How now ? Who opzn'd the Door without my leave ? Neice, this.is one | 1 o) your Girliſh tricks, will you always be a Child ? Will you never learn ſtaidneſs - F and gravity, notwithſtanding the perpetual Counſel you have from me, the per-- F petual diſpleaſure I ſhew at all ſort of youthful Follies 3 do not you know -how - I;hate impertinent Youth ?
Leo, Or any ſort o' youth to my knowledge. (afrae.) - £u. Donot I always tell you how fine a thing it 1s to be Grave; that Youth with Gravity, is very pailable, and almoſt eftcem'd equal with years ? Very wile - Perſons will not bz atham'd to match with Grave Youth; daily experience ſhews - it, and will you never leave ! Fy2z—fye—fye— I wou'd not for the World any Wiſe Sober Perſon o? Quality that has an Inclinatioa for you, ſhou'd: ha? ſeen this - rydeneſs in you, to Expoſe your Aunt in this manner, in her undreſs ; it might
ha? created .in him an averſion ſor you. |
Leo. An averſion to me, to ſee your ill dreſs ? ( aſide)
An. Madam, T hope you'l pardon the liberty I take in your preſence.
Vio. Oh ! good Madam. |
Au. Oh ! Madam — pardon me— 1 know 1 commit a Soleciſm in good Mane ners,:-— but. you are a Lady that has a great deal o' goodneſs, and a great. deal 0) worth-—
Vis. Oh ! ſweet Madam ! —
Az. Oh! Madam ! our Family has found it— you are pleas'd to Honour vs - with your Friendſhip. We may venture to expoſe our Frailties before you, . Madam,,you'l be ſo good to pardon— Madam—-
Vi. Oh! Madam! —
An.. Well really Madam—— I wonder where my Neice learns her wanton= - neſs, we are the moſt. reſerv'd Family in the World. There were Fourteen - Siſter's of us; and not one of us married. — -
Pio, It poſlible?
2 & !
Leo To »
Te,
6 | Sir Courtly Nice :
Leo. To your great prief— ( aſide.
Ai. We were all fo reſery'd. Oh! Madam ! no Man durſt preſume to think of us ; -— I never had three love Letters ſent to me in my whole life.
Fio. Oh! ſtrange!
Au. Oh! we were very reſerv\d. Well Madam I am very much out 6? Coun- tenance to appear thus before you.
Fio. Ok ! Madam, every thing becomes you Madam. ;
An. Oh ! you are very obliging Madam.-—Do you hear Netce— learn o? this Lacy ?
Leo. To flatter you. ( aſide.
Ay. Madam 1 am extream unſortunate, the affairs o' the Family call me away Iirom your {weet Converſation.
Vto. the misfortune is mine, Madam.
Ai. Oh! ſweet Madam your moſt humble Servant. |
Yio. Your humbler Servant dear Madam. Ha ! ha ! ha! what ridi- [ Exit -culous peice of Antiquity is this * Thy Erother has a great Honour for [. Aunt. His Family ſince he will keep: ſuch a relick of his Anceſtors as this.
Leo. All the Houſe is of a piece.
Vio. Nay if thou learnſt lewdneſs at home, thou haſt a great Genius to it.
Leo. Well, what do you think of my condition ?
F1is. I like it.
Leo. Like it ? |
Yo. Ay, for I peri2ive your Brother has put the whole force of his Wit into this Form of Gover::i-2nt ; 15 if we can battle it, he will find it is a dream fit for nothing but Uropia . #:d never rorment him{z1t and his Friends with it any more, then hel be a faui.icis Creature, and all of us happy in our Loves. Here he comes.
Enter Lord Bellguard.
Your Servant good my Lord.
Bell. Your moſt humble Servant Madam.
Leo. My Lord, why do you call him Lord ? he's a DoQtor and curing me o' the Palpication o? the heart, Falling-fickneſs, Convulfions in the Eyes, and other ſuch Diſtempers. | . Pio. A Doctor? a Quack by his Falſe Medicines; ſhortly we ſhall ſee him mount the Stage, or ſtand at the OlAa— Exchange and cry a Cure for your Horns, a Cure for your Horns. Bell. Pm glad toſce you ſo pleaſant Madam,
Vio. How can I otherwiſe chuſe my Lord, and ſee your Family and Government.
Bell. Faith, Madam he that will have a Garden muſt incloſe it, and cover tender Plants : this is a very blaſting age to Virtue, 'twill not thrive without a covering.
Vio. Av, but my Lord, you force your ground touch, what Horns wou*d not grow in your Soyle ? When wou'd not your Forehead ſprout ? Were I your Wife and thus kept, I ſhou'd ſpread like a Vine, and all the Walls in Erglazvd wou'd not hold me. . ;
Bell. Pm not o? that opinion, Madam:
Vio. Why ſhou'd you thing better 0? me than your Siſter ?
Bell. 1 judge very well of her, but muſt ſpeak freely I think few Women may be truſted in this life, this World is, and ever was a great brothel; where ?
or
>kp
LR WE -N ene DIAS, ap FE 90 ot
OTIS" IE FINK
SER on eto 0th nt of lf rad
"POPUP QDs
LL
Or, it cannot” Bs; oy = _
or with whom may a Woman he truſted ? with ancient Ladies ; they are the chief Beauty Merchants, venders of fine Love.
Leo. Ladies o? that Profeſſion. : | : Bell. Oh |! the moſt excellent, and moſt in Employ. Pedling Women cry*Scotch
Cloath of a groat a yard, ſtuff only fit for Footmen. But wou'd you have fine Beauty, Choich of Beauty, and with eaſe Security and Decency ? go to your [Lady Merchants ; in Common houſes the work is manag'd as {lovenly as Religion in Cons - venticles, enough to put one out of conceit with it ; but in Brothels o? Quality, Iniquity is carried on with that venerable order wou'd intice any one to Devotion, .
Vo, Fye! fye! ;
Bell. And with that ſecurity. A Man may there enjoy a Lady whilſt her- Husband holds her Cards. :
Leo. And ſhall the Lady o the houſe-know o? theſe things?
Bell. And manage *em too ; break the Lady to the Lovers hands ; that's the advantage 0? Quality, ifa young Lady has not a natural amble, a poor Bawd- cannot have acceſs to teach her. | | :
Vio. What can a Lady o' Quality propound by ſuch doings ? |
Bell Oh! many things. As Preſents; and Pleaſures. She has her houſe full of g00d Company, her Ears full of wanton Stories ; her Eye fall of tempting Sights, and now and then her Lips get a cloſe kiſs. Oh! Madam! do yon think it does not warm a Elderly Lady's blood, to have a brisk young Sparkalways by her ſide ? he is her Liquor of Life,and though ſhe never getsa fall draught,a taſt chears her heart.
Leo. Who are theſe Ladies? where do: they live !
Bell. Oh! you'd feign be acquainted with *em ? no ſuch matter ; and. yet Ile - © tell you where they live, SM Leo Where ?
Bell. Almoſt every where 3 where there is an Amorous Annt, or over-indul--
gent Mother.
Leo, Mothers ? will Mothers corrupt their Daughters ?
Bell, Ay, or if they wont Daughters will corrupt their Mothers. Things are * ſo inverted, that Ladies who-were honeſt all their Youth to be like their Mothers, .. turn lew'd in their old Age to be lite their Daughters. There never was ſuch an open and general War made on Virtne z young ones of Thirteen. will pickeere at” it, and by that time they are Twenty, they are riſen to be Strumpets General, and march in publick with their Baggage, with Miſs, and Maſs, and Nurfe and Maidy-. and a whole train of Reformade ſinners, expecting the next Cully. that falls.
Vis. You talk of paltry huſles. |
Bell. Very good Gentlewomen.
FS > ® Sir Courtly Nice : l
| Vie; Thoſe Winds blow where they liſt, A Woman is not ſecure. at home | from Cenſure. | _- But you muſk allow Jewel is not ſo ſafe in a Crow'd as hen lock'd up.
'Leo. Lock'dup ? do you think to lock me up ? Fell, think to ſecure thee, my dear Siſter.
| Women like Cbency ſhou'd be kept with care, Ex: One. flaw debaſe*'s her to common Ware. (Ext. ]
—________._ m__ 4
AcT. IKE
Scene Violante's houſe. Enter Violante and a Servant,
Vo. F Mr. Farewel coming ? Ser. Yes Madam, he's juſt at the Door: |
io. That's well, if this brisk young Fellow, has but Love enough to under-
take this work, and Wit enough to go through with ir, we ſhall all be happy. Enter Farewel.
.Fa. Where's your Lady ? Madam, your moſt humble Servant.
Vio. Your Servant Mr. Farewel; you are a happy Man, young, rich, and in the Ladies Favours. |
Fa. I'm glad to hear that, Madam; who are theſe Ladies Madam? a day, and hour of Youth and good Fortune is precious ; and Ladies like Birds muſt be aim'd at whilſt they hop about us, miſs that oppertunity you may looſe *em for ever. Therefore the Ladies, good Madam, quick, quick, for if you defer but half an hour, they'l be in love with ſome body elſe.
Vio. No Mr. Farewel, there is one Lady more Conſtant, you'l own it when 1
name her ; my Lord /lgzard*s delicate young Siſter, What ſay you to her ? Fa. I adore her.
FVio. And dare you attempt her ? Fa. Dare 1? Yo. Ay, for do not you know you are the only Man forbidden her. Fa. Do I know of what Race I am, Madam ? Never was ſuch a pack of Fops ' as my Lord Belguard's Anceſtors and mine. They lov'd wrangling more than we do intriguing z kept Lawyers inſtead o? Wenches, and begot upon their bodies, a thouſand illegitimate Law Suits, the Terms they obſerv'd as duly as the River does the Tydes, and Land was carried too and frow, as mud is in the Thames. Nor were their quarrels ſo bitter about Land, as place ; ſo big were their great hearts, they cou'd not come into one Room together, for fear of looſ- ing place. My Lord Belguards Father to end the difference, nioſt piouſly endea- vours to be a better Man than any of his Anceſtors. Thar is to ſay a Lord. Vis. And then the ſtrife ended ? |
—
—
Fa. Was
"_ PER os * RV”.
a 2. *, r q
Fa. Was more enflam'd. For my Lord was more inſolent, as having Authe- rity under the Broad Seal to be Proud, by Conſequence my Father moreenrag'd z and both the old Gentlemen contended who ſhou'd have the greateſt - Eſtate in malice, and attain'd to be very conſiderable, and when they dyed, endeavour'd to ſettle ir alt upon us. But truly the young Lady and I moſt prodigally conſum'd all our Portions at one look, and agreed to cut off the wicked Entail. |
Yio You did well, but how will you accompliſh your. deſires ? her Brother. has ſuch guards upon her, | |
Fa. Oh! "tis Decreed! nor ſhail thy Fate oh ! Brother ! reſiſt my Vow, though Guards were ſet on Guards, till their confounded Coxcombs reach'd the Skies, Þd o're nm all ——— Sls =
Vio. You are in a Rapture. oy Ol ie” AM
Fa. Ten thouſand when ever I think of her. | s
Vio. But how will you do this ? | | "0
Fa, I have leagu'd with a Witch at leaſt a young Fellow that has more . tricks then a Witch ; he was a poor Scholler at Oxford, but expelPd for ſtudy- ing the Plack Arts. | | wo <a» CC WS '
Vio. For Conjuring ?
Fa. Yes, Madam, not only any Man's Pigs or Poultry, but Wife or Daugh- ter into his Chamber. Nothing cou'd ſcape him, and he ſcap'd every thing. The Prod@tors watch'd more diligently for him, then a Benefice, and cou'd ne- -. ver catch him. The Grave Doctors abhor'd him worſe then a Hereſie, and ſtudyed more to keep him out of their Families, but he confauted their Skill;and they cou'd no more light upon him than on a jeſt. SENT
Vio. I long to ſee him. | |
Fa. 1 order'd him to come hither to me.
Enter a Servant.
Ser. Here's one Mr. Crack enquires for you, Sir.
Fa. That's he——bring him i, — __
Enter Crack.
Mr. Crack your Servant.
Cr. Your Servant Sir, your humble Servant, Madam.
Vio. Your Servant Sir, [ am told you have been an Oxford Scholler.
Cr. A Scholler Madam ? a Scholler's Egg—emptyed by old Suck-Eggs, of all that Nature gave me, and crumbl'd full of Eſſences, Hypoſtaſes, and other ſtuff o? their baking. | |
Vio. Why did not you apply your ſelf to Divinity ?
Cr, Leave Wenches for Pigs, Madam ; "tis trueI may Wench then too, but it muſt be with Fear and Reverence, I hate that.
Vio. Why wou'd not you be a Phyſitian ? | |
Cr. A Gold-finder Madam ? look .into Jakes for bits o? money? 1 had a * Spirit above it. I had an ambition to be of ſome honourable profeſſion ; ſuch _ as People of Quality undertake. As for inſtance, Pimping. A Pimp is as much a- bove a Doctor, as a Cook is above a Scullion z when a Pimp has fould a Diſt, a Doftor ſcours It. | |
Fio. This is an arch Blade. | | |
Cr. Oh! you are pleas'd to fay fo, Madam; %is more your goodneſs than-my deſert. | HH _——— ”
REECE e———_— EEE eee CS _ — CE eee Fee AE Ce et coed Been —— pero ewe Sees G—— 5 O
OT — —
10 Str Courrly Nice +
Fa. Well Mr. Crack, you know what you have undertaken.
Cr. Ple do't—The Lady's your's — Give me ſome Money.
Fa. There, there, — |
Cr. Gold! thou-Sun 'o the Sur, and Brother o' the Stars, Nutmeg o* comfort, and Roſe o? delight, as my Friend the King o? Perſia calls himſelf, —what can't thou not do great Prince, if I be thy chief Miniſter ?!— (Ex. )
Vio. This is 2 notable Fellow,-—our -next Plot muſt be to ſecure your Ri- val Sr. Courtly Nice. : ;
Fa. Hang him,. he ſecure's himſelf by his Fopperles, ſhe deſpiſes him.
Vio. Not many Lady's do fo.
Fa. Oh! no, Madam, he's the General Guitarre o'the Town, inlay*d with every
thing Women fancy; Gaytry, Gallantry, Delicacy, Nicety, Courteſy.
Vio. And pray put in Gold too.
Fa. True Madam, Oh !: the Ladies love to have him in their Chambers, and.
play themſelves aſleep with him. Vio. Well, I have provided one ſhall thrumble on him, Fa. Who's that? Vio. Surlcy.
Fa. Oh! Fire and Water are not ſo Contrary, Sr. Cowrtly is ſo civil a Creature, .
and fo reſpeQful to every thing belongs to a Gentleman, he ſtands bare to his own Perewig. Surly uncovers.to nothing but his own Night-c2p, nor to that if. he be drunk, for he flgeps in-his Hat. Sr. Co:rrly is ſo gentle a. Creature,he writes
 achallenge in the ſtile of a Billet-doux. Szrly talks to his Miſtreſs, as he wonld
to-a HeQor that wins his Money. Sr. Courtly 15 ſo pleas'd with his own Pzrion, his dayly Contemplation, nay his Salvation is a-Lookinglaſs, for there he finds
Eternal happineſs.. Swrly's Heaven, at leaſt, his Prieſt is his Claret (Glifs ;
for to that he confeſles all his Sins, and from it receives Abſolution and Co:1tort, But his Damnation is a Lookinglaſs, for there he finds an Etzrnal firs in his Noſe. In ſhort if you wou'd make a Pollet for the Devil, mingle theſe two, for therenever was ſo ſweeta thingasSr. Courtly, fo ſower as Surly. But how
Will you get *em together ?-for nothing has power over Surly, but Claret and the.
Devil. Vio. Yes | have. Heaven is pleas'd to think the Devil himſelf has not miſchief
.eaovgh to plague that ill-natur'd Rogue; and joyns me In Commitllion . with him to torment him with Love; he loves me. —
Fa. Love? can he love?
Vie. So much, he neglects his Claret for me 3 and-* comes hither hourly to- perform his Devotions to ime, but in ſuch a ſlovenly manner ;. "cis ſuch a N'o#- Eonformiſt to all decent Ceremonies.
rag Where's your Miitreſs *+ within. $ ,
_ FYio. Fhere him, wel ha” ſpert with him. He abhors his Love worſe than Murder or Treaſon, for thoſe are miſchiets to others, but Love he accounts High-.
Treaſon againſt his own damnable Perſon ; and he's more aſhan'd of it, than he wou'd be of a Beaſts Taile, if. it grew out of him. Therefore ]'le conceal, and do
you. charge himwith ir, you ſhall hear how he'l renounce it, then. will 1 appear
like Conſcience.to a ſick debauch, and you ſhall fee. what an. aukard Penicent. LE MAKke him-. | | (Exits. SEAT 0 | Fa.
Or, tt cannot Be, IT Enter Surly. 4 P
Fa. Honeſt Surly, how do'ſt do?
Sur. Prethee look in my Water.
Fa. In thy Water ? | RY
S:r. Ay, for I don'c love to anſwer impertinent queſtions.
Fa. Is it impertinent to enquire after the health of a Friend ?
Sur. A Friend ? thy talk is more boyiſh than thy Face. Do'ſt thou think there are ſuch Friends ? thou believ*ſt there are Mair-maids and Centaures I warrant; for ſuch Friends. Monſters that grow to ſome other Beaſts, and are
the leaſt part o? themſclves ? Fa. Why? haſt thou no concern for any Beaſts but thy ſelf ?
Sar. Yes Bird, for many things for my own ſake; for Witty Men-whilſ they drink with me, handſome Whores whil'it they lye with me, Dogs, Horſes or Cattle whilſt they belong to me z after that, I care not if the Wits be hangd, the Whores be pox'd, and all the Cattle bewitch'd.
Fa. A very generous temper. OY _ Sur. *Tis a wiſe and honeſt temper. The pretended good nature is ill nature; it makes a man an Afsto others he bears their Burden, a: Rogue to himſelf, he cheats himſelf of his quiet and Fortune. Iam ſo very honeſt to my ſelf, if the whole World were hang'd it ſhuu'd net rob me of a Minutes eaſe, I thank Heaven for it. Fa. Was ever ſuch a Barbarian ? | :
Sur. Thou"rtan Aſs z which is the Barbarian, he that eats Man, Or the Man that s eaten ? The Rogue that grieves away my Fleſh eats me, and is a Barbarian 3 fo is he that with vexation gnaws himſelf; 1 am no ſuch Cannabal.
Fa. Haſt thou no compaſſion ?
Sur. I know not what it is. Tp
Fa. Suppoſe you ſee a Man o' Quality in miſery.
Sur. Lethim be in miſery and be damn'd.
Fa. Are you not concern'd for his Quality ? | :
Sur. Theleſs for that, becauſe if he fancies the whimſey he has it to pleaſe hint;
Fa. To trouble him. |
Sur. Then to comfort him Ple tell him he's the Son ofa Whore, and his Grandfather roſe by Pimping.
Fa. Suppoſe you ſaw a Man o? parts unfortunate ?
Sur, Lec his parts Look after him.
Fa. They?l afflit him. by
Sur. Then to quiet him Ile t2ll him he's an Aſs.
Fa, Have you no charity ? do you never give any thing to the Poor ?
Sur, As much as any Man. |
Fa. Whats that ?
Sar. Nothing, |
Fa. Does no Man give any thing ?
S#r. Not to'the Poor ; they give it to themſelves; ſome Fools have Diſeaſes in their Natures, they never ſee any one in pain, but they feel half on't, and ſo they give money to eaſe themſelves.
Fa. Ha" you no love forany thing ?
Str, I have Appetite. A
2
T2 Sir- Courtl y Nzce «
Fa. Have you no love for Women?
Sur. I ha" Luſt.
Fa. No Love? pn ,
Sr. That's the ſame thing, the word Loveis a Fig-Leaf to cover the naked
' ence, a faſhion brought up by Eve, rhe Mother of Jilts, ſhe Cuckolded her Hus- band with the Serpent then pretended to modeſty and fell a making Plackets preſently. And her Daughters take up the Trade, you may import what Lewd- neſs you will into their Common-wealth, if you-will waſh it over with ſome fice Name. You may proclame at Markat-c1ofs, how great an Adorer you are of ſuch a Womans Charms ? how much you deſire to be admitted into her Service ; thar is, how luſty a Centaur you are, tat. the Horſe in you is much the Mijor part, and ſhe ſhall reccive all this without a bluſh, whilſt the Beaſt trots to her under the Name of a Lover 5 when if ſhe had any Wir ſhe'd know, a Lover is a more impudent name than \whoremaſter ; for a Whoremaſter throws all his Bombs at a whole City, your Lover waſts all his upon a ſingle Houſe. That when .a Woman deſires a Lover, ſhe delires to have ths whole Brute to her ſelf,
Fa. Ha! ha! ha! |
Sur. What do you laugh at Sir?
Fs. Only that your Miſtreſs has heard your learned Diſcourſes Sir. Pra: appear Madam, and own you have loſt your Wager, is -he a Lover or no?
| Enter Violante. - Sir. Here's a young; Treacherous Rogue. | |
Pio. Yes—a Brutal one—are theſe your Sentiments of Love Sir ? ivas it this You meant when you talk*d of-Love ? when we grow Lovers do wedegc::rate into Brutes? I thought there was a generous Paſlion,of which a Beaſt cou'd have.no-more fence, then he has of. Muſick or Poetry. And to ſuch Love you pretended Sir.
Szr. 1'le whedle her,. ( aſide 79 Fa. )
So I doſtill Madam, but why muſt ] let a Roy Catechiſe me ? {have that Muſica), Poetical, Fantaſtical love, you- ſpeak of, and a pox on me for it ; you'l neither be my Slipper,. nor my Shooe, my Wench to Slip on and oft at pleaſure, nor my Wife, that is a Whore buckled on.
Lio. You are charming in your expreſſions. |
Fa. Mr. Surly, Madam, is a miſt:cal piece, to be underſtood like a Prophecy, where Rams and He-Goats ſtand for Kings and Princes. Mr. Surly's, rank cx- Weſſions muſt ſignifie Virtue and Honour.
FYis. No, no, they ſignifie his own filthy meaning; and the truth is, love has no ather ſence, in this corrupt Age. Now if a Woman by bluſhes or other- wiſe, confeftes ſfie thinks a Man, a fine Gentleman, he to requite her ſends her preſently a Libel calPd a Billet-doux, where he in . fine words telis her to her Face,. he thinks her a Wench, and invites her to lye with him. This ruins all Converſation, Men are always driving: their brutal appetites to the plays,. the Courr,, to Church, like Drovers their Beaſts to every .Market ; and there's no converting. with *em,' unleſs you't take their Cartel off their hands.
Sar. Madam- I love, you in.your own faſhion, . admire you,adore you;and tie Devil and all, what wouw'd you have ?— Now will this iunple Jade. believe me?
Fa. He calls you ſimple Jade, Madam,.and fays- you'l believe 3 ajide to _ LR. Fare:
Sas
—_ -. a <0 .
.
Or, its cannot Be; Ls 13
Sr. You Malapert Boy, why do you meddle in my buſineſs ? Fa. *Tis my buſineſs, ſhe's my Friend, and I wont ſee her abus%d. Sur. A Friend to the Woman loves your Enemy, Tom-Fool ? Fa. No, ſhe hates him, and has quarrel'd with him, and I wou'd ha? had you ſtep into his room. A - ; Sur. Oh! oh! | 2 Fa. Now who's the Tom-Fool ? | Sr. Iam, look you Madam, that Rogue deſpair made me talk like an- Aſs,..
_
and I am forry for it.
Vio. I know you are Sir, I know your baſe deſire is for your puniſhment ; confin'd to my Eyes, and Þle uſe you as you deſerve.
Fa. Come, Madam, let me interpoſez though you will not receive .Mr. Swrly as a half-Horſe, you may as a whole Afs, a Drudge, you krow you .have . bulineſs moſt agreeable to his ill Nature, pray employ him.
Vio. Well; Ile make trial of him, you pretend you love me Generouſly. | Sur. Yes, and Damnably. -
; Viv. Know then my Lord Belguard, is (as I have of late perceiv'd ) ſunk with the reſt of the Age, into baſe opinions of Love and Women, that I am angry I ever had a good thought of him. |
Sur, Cood.
Vio. Look upon his addreſs to me, as an aſfront, and will revenge it.
Sar. Better and better.
Vio. And you jhall do it.
Sur. Beſt of all.
Vio. Do not you know Sir Conurtly Nice ? |
Sur. That you- ſhon'd jo9yn knowledge wita fach a Fop ? ?ris a queſtion to be- Put toa Boy ? I may know Philoſophy, but to ask a Man if he knows a Horn- Book ? for ſuch a thing 13 this Fop ; guilded on the out fide, on the inſide, the. : Criſs Croſs row, and always hanging at the Girdle of a Girl.
Yio. You have deſcrib'd him right. This Fop has my Lord Belguard enticd © to accept his Siſter with no Fortune, but her Birth and Beauty. Now-if you'l + break the Match, you'l be to me the moſt amiable Creature in the World. Sur, Or the molt damnable, if you Jilt me. Ws | Fio. Jn earneſt of a farther favour here's my hand.
Sur, Fhere's the- Devil in it. Tis transforming my. ſhape, 1 am growing @« + Womans Afs, I feel the Ears prick out o* my skin already; and I muſt hoof it*- away with her load of Folly upon my back. Well I am thy Afs at preſent, but | if thou Jilts me, I will be thy Devil. ( Ext. } =:
/% *Tis the fitteſt Office for thee 5 thou. art ſo like one already, you may pals: - for Twins. Now Mr. Farcrel let's go in and Laugh. (Exit.)
Sceae Lord Belgnards Horſe. Enter Hot-head and Teſtimony.
Teſt. He ſhail not ſpeak with her, 1 dont approve of it.- F
Alot. You apyrove Sirrah ? what ha? you to do? - 7
Teſt, I have Authority. -
Hor. You Authority ?
Teft. Yes, from my Lord.
Het, You had it then out.0
Fhis Kitchen, Sirrab the Beef o the Nation Breeds. |
A oO" *. q <itE - ;
T4 Str Courtly Nice :
all the Maggots in the Peoples heads. I am ſometimes tempted to throw down their Porridge-pots, and ſpill the Divine Right of Presbitery. In ſhort my Lord is a man of honour,*and you have belyed him Sirrah.
Tc. It is well known I make a Conſcience,
Hot, Ay,vou Ropes making o) Conſciences is 5 great trade aniang your Party and you deſerve to looſe your Eats for it,
Tcft, 1 mean I keepa Cor ſcience.
Hot. Yeve reaſon Sirrah, it keeps yon; but that an heneſt Lord ſhou'd give money for a Rogues ſilſe Conſcience, -—Oones ! —
Teſt. Well bur dont ſwear.
Hot. Sirrah, who ſwears ? |
Teft. Dee hear ? — dont ſwear I ſay.
Het. Cones ! Sirrah, don'c preach to me.
Teſt. Don'c ſwear then.
-H1t. Sirrah, if you. preach to me, Vle cut your Pate.
Jeſt. Had Ia Sword *twere more than you cou'd do.
Hot. How now Sirrah ? (rakes Telt. by thethroat. )
Teſt. Nay bat don'c throttle me, don'c Godfrey me. |
Enter Aunt. |
Aunt. What's the noyſe ? what's the rudencſs, Couſin Hot-head ? you a Gentleman, and make a Bear-Garden of a Perſon of Honours houſe ?
Hot. Better make a Bcar-garden of it then a Conventicle ; here's 2 Fanatick Rogue ordain'd ruling elder ot*ch* Family by my Lord, as the Rogue ſays, ſo he -undertakes to Govern and Preach.
Ax. And you undertake to Govern and corre& ? Couſin no body Governs here but I if he had committed faults, you ſhou'd have brought him before me.
Hot. Oh! you'd have him enter'd in your Office ? |
Ai. What do you mean ? obſcenely ? you are confident. You are the firſt Gen- Heman that offer'd to ſay a wanton thing to me.
Hot. To your great ſorrow. (aſicle.
Enter Leonora,
Teo. What's the quarrel here ?
Hot. There's a Taylor wou'd fain ſpeak with you.
Leo. Ail this noyſe to introduce a Taylor ? nn
Hot. He can't get through this Fellows narrow Conſcience, yet there is room for a whole Common-wealth. |
Ax. Call in the Taylor ; there muſt no Cloaths be made without my orders, that I may ſee *em modeſt.
Leo. A Taylor? I order'd no Taylor. ( afiae.)
Enter Crack.
Au. How now, Sir ? what are you ?
'Cr. A Taylor, Madam.
Au. Who ſent you ? I know you not,
Cr, Your own Taylor, Mr. Stirch, Madam.
Au, How chance he came not himſelf ?
Cr. He's ſick, Madam.
As. And-can you work well, for we are very hard to pleaſe ? There's farce bo | | a Taylor
BT an TW Art a ens * . _— Lb wie ih ts 14 4 w:
OT IRE Ras ”
A by ae Ws pet F ; t
F
nad.
OF it cannot Ber re
a Taylor in” Town can make me endure to ſee my ſelf.
Leo. The fault lyes in — Fifty — Fifty. — (afide.) Cr. Indeed Madam, I muſt needs ſay my Country men are not” the beſt Tay- lors in the World. This is a fine Nation, and all ſpoyl'd by. the Taylors, Hea- ven makes the Women Angels, and Taylors make %*em Hedg-hogs; *tis a fad-3
ſight to ſee *em, now 1I'le make an Angel of a crooked Pin..
Au. Ay, where did you learn your Skill ?
Cr. In France, Madam.
Teſt. In France ? then Friend I believe you are- a Papiſt.
Hot. Sirrah, 1 believe you are a Presbyterian.
Teſt. Friend, if you be a Papiſt I'le ha? you before a Juſtice; »
Het. Sirrah, if you be a Presbyterian, I'le kick. you down Stairs-
Teſt, What are you Friend ?
Hot. By, What are you Sirrah ?
Cr. What am I ? why, Pm a Taylor, I think- the men-are mad.
Ax. Intolerable z Mr. Teſtimony pray leave us, and Couſin Hot-head,' I- ſhall + deſire the ſame of you, unleſs you'l behave your ſelf like a Gentleman. *
Hot. I will behave my ſelf like a Gentleman, for I'le know of my Lord when - he comes home, if he has given this Rogue Authority over me; if he has Ple-- demand SatisfaQtion of him 5; if he be innocent woe be to your Prick-ears, Sirrah...
Teſt, I fear you not. (Ex Hot.) :
Au. Mr. Teſtimony, 1 once more defire yon'l give us liberty. |
Teft. Yes, Forſooth, I daretruſt the young Gentlewoman with yon Ferwelns: you are a grave —Gentlewoman and in yy Forſooth. —
Az. In years, rude Clown. —
Teſt. And truly ſhe's a very pretty ſweet Woman, - and deſerves to have great- care taken of her, A
Leo, Well Sir, we'l excuſe the care at this time— }
Teſt. Pretty Woman— ( afie?.
Leo. Pray leave us ——
Teſt. Sweet Woman —-I profeſs ſhe *'$ ſtranzely alluring, 1 had beſt retire Teaſt* I fall into frailty, and bz diſcover'd. ( Exit".
Cr. Now, Madam, before 1 take meaſure of yon, Ple ſhew you ſome. Pat-+ - terns— pleaſe you to look upon ſome Madam, you have judgment. —
( to-the Aunt.” .
A;!, Let me ſee. |
Cr. To you, Madam, I wou'd recommend this pieces
Leo. Mr. Farewe!'s Picture ? oh! ISirrah ! now I gueſs thee—my Dear->- Dear — (kiſſes the Piftare..
Cr. Have a care o) your Aunt Madam. —1I have a Letter too, —-
Leo, Give & me——quick—-quick— -
£4. Theſe are preity Silks.
Cr. The beſt in Frazce, Madam. |
Where's my Siſter ? ( Belgnard-.withins:.
Zco. M; Brother ? I hope. he does not know thee. | :
Cr. No, if he docs I'm a' dead- Man.
Leo. Haſt thou no. diſguiſe for fear he ſhou'd ? Pn 98
Cr.-Only this great..pair of Spectacles. ©. - © PReAT |
'Str Courtly Nice : Enter Lord Belguard,
Bell. What Ecllow's this ? | $.co. A Taylor, . Bell. Not your Taylor ? _ Au, No, be's fick and fent this Fellow in his Room,
Bell, How comes ſuch a young Fellow to wear Spectacles ? Cr. Young my Lord ! I'm above Five and Fifty,
Bcll, Thon bear't thy ave we!,
Cr. Ay, every where but in my Eyes I thank Hearen.
Bell, This Fellow may be a Bawd for ought I know, Pic watch him. (Ext,
Aunt views the Tatterns, Bell. ſtands bibind bis Sifeer, aud watches Cr. Cr. mean while puts bis Meaſure before,and diljvers her a Letter,
Cr. Well, Madam, I perceive your Lady ſhip likes the Pattern 1 ſnew?d you firſt. Leo. I have ſeen the whole piece. Cr. And your Ladyſhip likes it ?
Leo. Oh! very well.
Cr. Ple aſſure you, Madam, you'l like it mightily when *tis upon you,and you have a ſweet body to work for. I do not doubt Madam, but to get a great deal 0? credit, and a great dc2l of Cuſtome by you among the Ladies, es ſoon as ever they ſee my work. Leo. Well let's ſee your work, and Ple ſay ſomething.
. Cr. That you hal} & ſpeedily, Madam, Ple bring you home as ſweet a piece 0' Work, as ever you had in your Life. You'l look upon the Pattern I ſhew'd you laſt? Leo. Yes. ""—=
Cr. That's for the inſide ; do you like much Bombaſt, Madam ?
Leo. No. —
Cr.- Well, Madam—-I ha? taken a Surveigh o' your fine Body——now you ſhall be pleas'd according to your own hearts delire—-----your Servant Madam— ( Exit. Bell, Well Siſter---prepare to receive a Viſit from Sr. Courtly Nice, this Afternoon.
Au. Oh ! dear! then I muſt dreſs. He's a great Critick. ( Exit. Leo. She deſigns him for her {clf, won'd ſhe cou'd get him. (aſide.
Bell. Sr. Courtly and 1 have agreed ; pray give him your promiſe.
Leo. So Soon ? "twill be fulſ-me, he's abſtemious.
Bell. Therefore take him whiPi he has an edge.
Leo. You uſe to deſpiſe Fools, how chance you marry amongſt 'em ?
Bell. Becauſe none but Fools will marry. Wits are but few and commonly poor ; Fools are numerous and rich. Fortune is as fond of thoſe bits of Men, as Bigots are of Reliquesz wraps %em in Silver, | : : Leo. Better they were buryed. A Fool in a Coach is like a Kffave in a Pillo- ry, the Object of publick derilicn. E
Bell. Oh! thereare few to deride em, many to admire *em, ſo many, I have, oft, admired how one Apple ,
| Shou'd ſuch Diſeaſes in old Adam trced. :
That from his Loyns rot Men, kut Worms proceed. ao aplory
%
OP Tn I Pc 7 PR eres. TY PU Ye 0 ds ”" % DS NE II IEEE ITC, of 192. eta as
. Or, it cannot Be,
Acr. Il.
Scene, Covent-Garden-Square. Enter Farewel and Crack meeting.
-_
Fa. H! the News! the News ! art thou an Angel or a Devil ? bring'ft thou Joys or Torments ? . Joys! joys! joys /
Fa. angel Angel! Angel !
Cr. In the firſt place I deliver*d your PiQure.
Fa. Rare. |
Cr. And ſhe kiſſed it.
Fa. kiſled it ?
Cr. Sweetly, wantonly, laſciviouſly. She ſet me fo on fire, I kifgd all the Wenches as I came along, and made their moylt lyps fiz again.
Fa. Oh! Rogue ! Rogue ! delicious Rogue.
Cr. Then I deliver'd the Letter, and before her Brothers face.
Fa. Before his face ? ha! ha! ha! |
Cr, Prepare this Night to be the happyeſt o*Mortals. Give me ſome more mony:
Fa. Mony ? ['le ſell my Laud rather than thou ſhalt want. That one Inheritance will purchaſe me two,one in Love,and another in laughing at this politick Brother.
Cr. No, no, Irheritances as for laughing, I believe you will have an Anuity for life; but for Love you'l only have a leaſe for three or four Years.
Fa. Pleaſant Rogue ! here's Money.
Cr, So, ſo, I wiſh you joy, I wiſh you joy. (Exit.)
Fa, See Surly going to my Rival; my affair thrives admirably. ( Exit.) Enter Surly. Knocks, cnter a Servant,
Sur. Is Nice within ? |
Ser. Nice Sir ?
Sur, Ay, Nice Sir ; 1s not your Maſters name Mice.
Ser. ?Tis Sir Courtly Vice, | nm
Sir, Well Sir, if I havea mind to clip his Name, "tis not Treaſon, is it Sirrah*.
Ser. 1 believe not Sir. | ;
Sur. Then get you in, and tell your Maſter I'd ſpeak with him.
Ser. What ſort o' domineering Man is this?
Scene, a Chamber— Sir Courtly Nice dreſſing, Men and Women finging to him.
Sir Co. Very fine! extreamly fine. Gentlemen and Ladies, will you do me the favour to walk in, and accept of a ſmall Collation? I am in ſome haſt to dreſs upon an extraordinary occaſion. You't Pardon me ? —your very humble Ser- Vant.— (Exit Muſick. }
Ser, Very fine. | ow
Sir Co. You Sot, 'twas very barbarous.
Ser, Your honour ſaid *"twas very fine. . A
Sir Co, You Clown, don't you know what belongs to: a Gentleman ? Congs
D Plaiſance
LE 3 ITE
men er eo (>) d,
-
18 Sir Courtly Nice : plaiſance is the very thing of a Gentleman ; The thing that ſhew's a Gentleman, Wherever I go, all the World cryes that's a Gentleman, my life on't a Gentle - man ; and when yave ſaid a Gentleman, you have aid all. :
Ser. Is there nothing elſe Sir belongs to a Gentleman ?
Sir Co. Yes, Bon mine, fine Hands, a Mouth well furniſ'd —
Ser. With fine Language, —
Sir Co. Fine Teeth you ſot ; fine Language belongs to Pedants and poor Fel- lowsthat live by their Wits. Men of Quality are aboveWit. "Tis true for our diver- ſion ſometimes we write, but we ne'r re;ard Wit. I write but I never writ any Wit.
Ser: How then Sir ? | 7
Sir Co. I write like a Gentleman, ſoft and eaſe. |
Ser. Does your Honour write any Plays ? T
Sir Co. No, that*s Mechanick, I beſtow ſome Garniture on Plays, as a Song 17 a Prologue. :
Ser. Fhen your Honour is only a Haberdaſher o' ſmall Wares ?
Sir Co. A Haberdaſher, you ſawcy Raſcal ?. C
# >} Rl Emer a Servant,
2. Ser. Here's one Mr. Surly to viſit your Honour. -
Sir Co. Surly, what the Devil brings him hither ? | - 2+ Ser. He has been walking about the Rooms this quarter of an hour, and
wou d not let me bring him in, till he had fould %em all with his dirty Shoes. Sir C9. A Nauſcous, Beaſtly, Sloven, Clown, Fool, Sor. Enter Surly. | Pear Mr. Surly your moſt humble Servant. (Sir Co. Bows to receive him, Sur. What, are you unbu—buckling my Shone ? | | ( Sur. 5 Drunk, ftammars and belthes.) Sir Co. Dear Mr. Surly —he ſtinks horribly——— [ aſide. How came I to enjoy a very Polecat——— [aſide This great happyneſs ? pox / foh! you and I have been long [aſide. Jiqnee, and I'm amaz'd to ſee you at my leveg. | Sur. | begin to think, thou art a good honeſt Fellow, and have a mind we: ' Hou'd no longer be two lo——lo——Loggerheads, but one. Fns Co. Dear Sir, you are always fo divertifing , Well Sir,ſhall I beg a. favour of you 5 Sur. What's that ? | Sir Co. Leave to dreſs before you, Sir. I am to meet ſome fine Women to day;, ene preſently, Sir. Prethee drefs, and be damnd— ſhall we di——dine together ?. Sir Co. Yes Sir, I ſuppoſe, and Sup too.—— 2 Sur. Fhat's kind, well when ? Sir Co. About Five 0? clock Sir. Sur. Where ?
,
- . _- - -
SONY.
Or, it cannot Be,
Sur, Pox © the Lady ; I ask where we ſhall Dine?
Sir Ce. Really Sir I don't know, 1 can't put my head into one o your beaſtly eating houſes, nor ſwallow the filthy meat you cat there, if you'd give me One.
 houndred pound.
Sur. Filthy Meat ? Sir I eat as good Meat as you do.
Sir Co. Oh! dear Mr. Sarly, no doubt the meat in its own nature may be very innocent ; but when once it has committed familiarity with the beaſtly Fiſts of Cooks and Putchers, ?cis to me an unpardonable Sinner. My Butcher cuts up all | his Mcat with a Fork. |
Sur. Does he cut np an Ox with a Fork ?
Sir Co. Ay, and he cuts up an Ox as neatly as a Lady does a Partridge.
Sur, Well, then- Ple accept o' thy Dinner. ;
Sir Co. Dear Sir, your moſt humble Servant z pox on him (ſide) I will I be capable o? the great happyneſs. For I came but laſt Night from my Country houſe, and I queſtion whether I have all things in order or no. Whoſe there? are all things brought from my Country houſe ?_
Ser. No Sir, your Butler has forgot your Salt :
Sir Co. Left my Salt ? careleſs Raſcal. Let him take Horſe immediately.
Ser. Sir he's rid poſt for it.
Sir. Rid poſt for Salt? whether ?
Sir Co. To my Country houſe.
Sur. How far's that off ?
Sir Co. But a little way, not above Forty miles. : | . Sur. Send Forty miles out o* Zondon for Salt? Is there not Salt enough in London or you ? : ;
Sir Cs. Ay, ſtuff pawm'd by Butlers and Waiters, they take up the Wenches coats, then handle the Salt. | Sur. Here's a Rogue—( aſide ) well come lets drink a Glaſs o? Wine then,
Sir Co. Oh! dear Mr. Sarly, if you name Wine, you make me throw up my .. Soul. I have abhor'd Wine ever ſince 1 was in Frarxce, and ſaw what barbarous Education they give that generous Creature. Duce take me, Sir, if the Clowns don't preſs all the Grapes with their filthy naked Feet. Oh ! beaſtly naſty Dogs ! no wonder weare poylſon'd with their Wine. |
Sur, Prethee what o* that ? the Wine purges before it comes over. | ; Sir OW ! Lord Mr. S«rly what a Phraſe is there? you'l Pardon my Free-
om, Sir ? — |
Sur, Moſt civil Coxcomb (afide) well what muſt we drink, for drink I muſt ? ; te y I have ſeveral drinks of my own compoſing at your Service, as Acad,
er, Ale, — ; FR Ale? there's Sauce for a Woodcock. Come let?s taſt -a Bottle. |
Sir Co. Fetch a Bottle 5 This Fellow will Poyſon me.— (afede)
Sur, Well I come to requeſt a favour o? thee.
Sir Co. Your moſt humble Servant Sir, how de'e? like this Cravat ?
Sur. What's that to my buſineſs? I come to make a requeſt to thee,
Sir Co. *Tis well tyed tao, with a great deal o' humour. |
Sar. A Pox on thee, mind me. 2
Sir Co, Your moſt humble —_ Sir.
- 4:0 2 22 <--of
20 | Sir Courtly Nice : Sur. lam going to make Love, 6
Sir Co. Before you drink Sir ?
Sur. Before I drink Sir. —— Sir Co. Well Sir, ſince you'l have it ſo, I'le wait on you down ſtairs.
Sur, Is the Devil in the Fellow ? | tell thee I'm going to make- love. Sir Co. Oh ! Lord Sir, I beg your pardon a thouſand times. Sur. And I come to beg thy aſſiſtance.
Sir Co. Oh! dear Sir. | Szr. For thou haſt a knack on't. Thou art the only Court Card Women love
to play with; the very Pam at LZaztereloo, the Knave that picks up all,
Sir Co, Oh! Sir, you are ſo obligi1g; —and ſtinking —Pox take him — (aſ7de.
Sur. And 'tis a very pretty Woman F'm in Love with; my Lord Belouard's Siſter Leonora ; thou know'it her, | . Sir Co, The Rogue's my Rival, he was born for my confuſion ( aſide. ) Ay, Sir, I have the honour of ſome iſmall acquaintance there.
Sur. Prethce ſpeak for me.
Sir Co. Oh! dear Sir, you have a great Talent of your own.
Sur. Bat thine's a better. One thing 1 am ſure thou may'r do, there's an a- bominable Fop makes Love to her, and 1 am told is to marry her; prethce tell
him he's a Son of a Whore. Sir Co. Really Sir P'm unfortunate; I ha? no manner o* Genius to that ſort
o* Converſation.
| Sur. Say my words. Tell him if he proceeds, I'le not only Libel him, but tweag him by the Noſe, Kick him, Cudgel him, ard run kim through the Guts. Prethee tell him this. | (hugs SIr Ca.
Sir Co Oh! pray Sir give me Ayr.
»S4r. Prethee do.
Sir Co. Sir I am ready to.—
Sur. And thou wilt tell the Pupy this ? |
Sir Co. I will upon my Soul. Enter a Servant with Wine and. Glafſes.
| Sur. Then thow-art an honeſt Fellow—-ſo, is the drink come ? fill a Glaſs, ” why two Glaſſes ? do you think [ cannot drink after your Maſter ?
Sir Co. Pox o? your Complement. — [ 4ſrae. 2. gr. og 5 A
Sxr. Here Nice, my Miſtreſſes health, | way 4 Claſs,
' Sir Co. What miſery is this Beaſt impoſing on me ?7 he coughs in the Glaſ
too, — | | | [ aſide.
Sar. Pox en", a whole gulp went the wrong way,, come off. with it, *Tis my
Miſtreſles health. Sir Co. This Fcllow's the Devil — C afide: 7
Sxy.. Off with it, Man. Sir Co. I never was ſocmbaraſs'd ſince I was. born. —
Sur. Oones! off with ir. | ; Sir Co: | muſt take the beaſtly. portion. down, but I. ſhall be moſt' horrible L drinks. ] ;
- fck after it. — == ; hoy are an honeſt Fellow, now 1'le kiſs thee.
Sur, So, Now t wy 1 Sir Co, The Devil thou wilt. ?. more miſeries ? Laſide ] nay but Mr Swrh. L
-_ - — ” —  -
Or, #t cannot Be,
Sur, I ſwear 1 will: Sir Co, Vay but you! diſorder me.
Sr.
I iwear I will.
Sir Co. But Sir Ptn going upon your occaſions to your Miſtreſs. Sur. Nay then I'le give thee two kiſſes, one for thy ſelf and another for her. Sir Co. Oh! H2Il.( afide ) nay but Mr. Surly.
Sar,
I ſwear I will. [ kiſſes him and belches—]
TE
. 2k
This Bottle Beer is damn'd windy —well honeſt Vice farewell to thee. [Exit. Sir Co. Who's there? Pm ſick to death, —to death ! —lead me in—get my bed ready —and a Bath—and ſome Perfumes-—Pm ſick to death, —I'm
dead.
[ Exit. ] Scene Lord Belgnard?s Houſe. E nter Bell. with Farewel's Piilure in bis band.
Bell. Thou horrid Viſion ! wou'd I had met with the worſt Fiend in Hell, rather than rhee ; in thee there is a Legion exciting me to Blood---blood--- Who's there?”
Ser.
Enter a Servant.
My Lord——
Bull. My Coach—to blood —blood.-—-
Leo.
Enter Leonora and Aunt. To Blood ? what means my Brother ?
Bell. Be gone.
Leo, An.
To whom do you ſpeak ? Bleſs ns! Nephew what ailes you ?
Leo. Alas my Lord, I fear you area going to quarrel. Bell. Yes, I'm going to puniſh- one who. Violates my Fathers, my Will and calls my Mother Whore.
Leo.
What execrable Wretch is that ?
Bell. Thy ſelf,
Leo, Me ?
Bell. Yes, what doſt thou. elſe but proclaim our Mother falſe, when ſhe con-. ceiv'd a thing ſo , Oppoſite to all our Fathers race as thou art 7
Leo.
In- what ?
Bell. In Infamy ; 3 when was there a ſpot in our name, till Heaven for our ſins- ſent thee amorg us ? and I am going todeſtroy thee in thy lewd undoer. Eeo.-1 know of no reproach in our Family but. your madneſs, deſtroy that. .What are your Spyes and Coxcombs, but ſo many Capital Letters, wherein. you. write over your Door, My Siſter is a wanton Woman. Bell. *Tis truth, you are not only a wanton, but a wicked' Woman 3 not. only Intrigue, bur with the Enemy of cur Family,” Farewel;
At.
Leo.
Bell,
Leo. Bell. Leo.
Bell, Att,
How ?
I am. betray\d— [aſp de.
Do you bluſh ?
At your Folly.
Dare you deny it ?
Who dare accuſe me ?
This Picture, which I found in your Chamber. Horrid. Creature !/——1 ſhal] —__ IDA
Leos. +
"22 Sir Courtly Nice : Leo. How ſhall 1 bring off this ( aſide) All this noiſe for a Picture ? if you had ny a little humane Effigics in ſwadling Clouts, there might ha? been ſome ſ{quawling. | | $99" Do you lavgh at your ſhame ?
Bell, She ſhall ha* no calc.
Leo. Do, kill me, before you know whether he's guilty or no.
Bell. Ple know it from himſelf. If ke denys it, it will be ſome revenge to make him ſtab his Soul with Lies. He ſhall ſwear not only that he never did, but neyer will ſend ſo much as an Imagination to you. | ;
: Leo, Do, if you wou'd force him hither, what charm to a Man of Spirit, like aring ? ;
Beil. She ſpeaks ſence in that. 7 Sk,
Les, It you wou'd be fighting, fight your own jealoufie, which abuſes you worſe than Mr. Farewel can do, my Honour protects you from him ; but nei- ther Wit or Honour, can guard you from the rude inſolence of your jealou- ſie, which is now ſending you of an Errant, a Footman o? Spirit wou'd ſcorn, to Proclaim the diſhonour of your own Siſter. Fye ! Fye! |
Bell. And ſo I muſt ſit down tamely with this abuſe ?
Leo. You are not abus'd, the Picture was found at Church.
Au. At Church? do you intrigue at Church ?
Bell. They do nothing elſe, the Church is almoſt as bad as the Porch.
Az. Nay there's ſhameful doings, that's the truth on't, it provokes my Fleſh to fee how the young Men fling their Eyes about.
Teo. And not upon her. —-——[afiae]
Az. But "tis no marvail; when Women will encourage ?em. No Fellows dare ZaPpe upon me, becauſe 1 never encourage t ellows,
Leo. A Face of fifty is ſmall encouragement. [aſide]
Bell. Nay no wonder the Devils cauſe thrives, he has a numerous Clergy, Heaven has but one Miniſter in the Church, and whiPſ he is Preaching Divini- ty, the Devil hasa thouſand of both Sexes, by all the Oratory of looks and dreſles, preaching Fornication and Adultery. |
Ax. Too true, well ſhe's certainly undone. Idare not examine her Breaſts, if there ſhou'd be any thing in*em, 1 ſhou'd dye.
Leo. In my breaſts?
Ra Ay, Gentlewoman, do you think I regard your Flim flam ſtory o* the Church?
Leo. *Tis not my Story, my Woman found it in Weſtminſter Abby, at Prayers, and I knowing what work wou?'d be made with it, commanded her to bura it, and ſhe has dar'd to diſſobey me. :
Wom. Indeed, Madam, I thought to have preſented it to a Freind o* mine ; and laying it out o' my hand unfortunately in your Honours Chamber, my Lord found it.
Bell. Oh! how nimbly ſhe takes the lye at the firft rebound ?
An. Out upon you ; Pm extream fick —lead me in —not you——you are not fit to touch a Woman o' my Virtue. Theſe things have ſtrange impreſſion vpon me. — (Exile. ).* ws |
Leo. That you don't ſhare in *m—= | ( afiae. )
Bell,
_ Or, it cannot Be. 27
Beff. Pray, Siſter ? goout o' my ſight, you-are an horrour to me.
Leo. Your own Dreams are. Y*are as mad as a Prophet, you have always before your Eyesa Viſion of Horns and Whores. |
Bell. All this goes upon the ſcore of Farewe!'s heart-blood if he be guilty, I'le make enquiry preſently, and ſcearch at what gap this Treachery entered.
Leo. Oh ! unfortunate negligence ! [aſide ] [0 Exit. ]
Emer Hothead. |
Bell, Who's there, Couſin- Hor-head, Teſtimony ?
Hos. Oh ! are you here ?
Bell. Ay, to your ſorrow, if you have play'd me falſe.
Hot. You ha? ſerv'd me finely.
Bell. Do you firſt complain ?
Hot, Conpled me with a Dog ?
Bell. But yon ha? Coupled my Siſter Sir,
Hot. With a Fanatick Rogue.
Bell. No—with a finer Gentleman. Who brought” this PiQure ?
Hot. The common Fire-fork of Rebellion. -
Bell. A Fire-fork.—Fork me no Forks — Who brought this Pifture ?
Hot. The rotten rump ſhou'd ha? been burnt—when *twas only Roaſted.
Bell. The rotten Rump— Anſwer me or Ile fight thee, |
Ft. Anſwer you what ? |
Bell, Who brcught this Picture ? I found it in my-Siſters Chamber. |
Hot. Then your Fanatick Rogue convey*d it thither to make me ſuſpeted; out of his malice - to the Common-Prayer. Ple cut the Rogue to Pieces.
Enter Teſtimony. with. a great Sword by his ſide.
Bell, Teftimony.
Teſt. Tam here. is
Zell. How now,Sworded ?' _— |
Teſt. To preſerve my Life. My life is threatned by that bloedy- Papiſt.
Hot, How, Sirrah? dare. you think of fighting me ? . Teft. Yes,. and hope to do it, through Providence. | | Bell. Drawing before me ? (Hot. and'Teſt. offer to draw.)
Hot. Will you-prote@ a Faratick ? I ſee what you are. : Well Sirrah, though I. may not cut your Fhroat, Ile choak you Sirrah. Teft. De'e, hear the bloody Papiſt ? Hel: throttle me. | Hot. Sirrah, I'le cram the Oaths ofAllegiance,and Supremacy into you,and they ſtick in your Throat,though Treaſon wont,and ſo Vle to a Juſtice preſently. (Ex. Bll. and ſtay. with-him, and.never plague me more. Now-Sir-do you reſolve my queſtion. | "EIS 2 ; Teſt. do reſolve I will not take the Oaths- Wo Bell. I do not ask you about the Oaths- WEEDS Jr 'Teft. Why, if you ask me Ten thouſand times; I will not take tha Oaths/ Beil. Did one ever ſee ſuch a Coxcomb ? 2 Teft.. Call me what you pleaſe, 1 will not take the Oaths—Souo your Werſt.( Ex; Bell. Avery fine account of my bulineſs. Enter a Servaat..
Ser, My Lord a Gentleman delires to ſpeak with your Honours. | a et :
24 | Sir Courtly Nice :
Bell. Pm not to be ſpoke with, Pm a broad— my Soul is — in the heart of Farewel, tipping it up for this Secret. What Gentleman ?
Ser. One trom th' Eafi-[zdies,My Lord, he brings a Letter from your Uncle Fich,
Be!!. He comes in a Storm; he will iind worſe Weather here, than any he Mer at Sea. But I'le endeavour to compoſe my felf —admit him. —
Enter a 7am drift like a Herchant,
Man, My Lore, your Lordſhips moſt bumble Servant. I perceive your Lord- ſhip has forgot me; you will know mc better, when I acquaint you, who [ am. My Father had the honour of being a Retainer to your Lordſhips Fa- ther, of Honourable memory ; and ſent me ſome Years ſince to the Eaſt Indies,
2n the Service of your Noble Uncle, Mr. Rich. My name is Wayrewel.
Bell. On! Vr. Waytewel, I am glad to ſee you, truly you are fo. chang'd, if you had not told me who you was, 1 ſhou'd never ha? known you.
Mar, ] believe fo my Lord-— for Pm ſure you never ſaw my Face before, but the Picture of it you have— for IWaytewel was my Picture, (aſide) Time and Travels will alter a Man, but truly I have loſt.nothing by my Travels but my Countenance; and in the room have gotten what's better, a convenient ſmall competency of ſome Seven or Eight thouſand ponnd ; Haven and your Uncles love be prais'd. I have brought Your Lordſhip ſome Letters from your No-
ble Uncle, and a ſmall Preſent of ſome Threeſcor? thouſanu pound.
Bull How ?
Man. Only the trouble of it, my Lord. Your Uncle coptract'd in th* Indiesan intimate Friendſhip with Sir Nicholas C alico, Preſident tor ti:e Eajt India Company. Sir Nicholas dyed, and left moſt part of tis Eſtate ( v.!:ich was near-a Hundred thouſand pound, ) to his only Son, Sir Thomas. But poor Sir Thomar happen'd in his Fathers Life time to fall into a Diſtemper, which gave him a ſcurvy flaw in his Brain, that Sir Nicholas left him and all his Eſtate to your Uncles Guardianſhip. Now your Noble Uncle perceiving his affairs are like to detain him many Years in. th? [nates, and fearing if he ſhou'd dye, poor Sir Thomas might be cheated of all ; he has likea Worthy and honeſt Gentleman, ſent Sir Thomas and all his Eſtate to your Lordſhips care, as theſe Letters will teſtifie, I ſuppoſe your Lordſhip 1s well ac- quainted with your Uncles Hand and Seal. * |
Bel. 1 am, and this is his Hand and Seal, reads—um——um-——um—to preſerve him from being cheated here, or beg'd in England, I take the boldneſs to recom- mend him, tothe care of ſo Noble a Perſon as your Lordſhip—-um— um— um.— Well Sir the Letter expreſics what you told me, — W here is the Gentleman.
A7an. 1 brought him along with me; he's in the next room, my Lord. Poor Gentleman, he has the odGe{t Phraſes and ways with him. He will needs be at- tended like a great Indian Mandarine, or Lord. And has brovght with him ſeveral] Stamites and Baitammers, that ſerve him as his Slaves, in the ridiculous Dreſles and Modes of their own Countries. we had ſuch a gaping Rabble after us, as we cams along;
Bill. Pray call him 1, 1 long to ſce him. —
Mun. fir Jroma—— pray come ro my Lord.
Enter Crack ridiculouſly dreſt, attended by Men, in the Habits of Slamites, aud Bantammers. Cr, Which is the Peer? | Alan,
am—_—————
Or, it cannot Be, 5
Man. This is my Lord. Cr. Great Peer, your extream pos Servant. .- Bell, Your: Servant Sir, you are recommended:-to me, by my Uncle: Cr. I know it my Lord, and am moſt incomparably oblig?d to him. — Heis a Perſoh,, my Lord, that as to the altitydes of Friendſhip, and the moſt glorious Cir-  cumſtances of a Singular. Perſon, i is: a to'be caſt- up by the Logarithmes, of Ora» tory; nor his Latitude to be taken by The eullenge of Circuilocution. | PR . Bell So—1. find 1 ſhall ha? road 0n-ſences | r. My.Lord; I'm -Horſon that as-to the: Circumſtances of Net not.in-. arent contemptible; and-as to the circumſtances of Honour, I am. by profe- flion a Merchang, by-Generation.a- Knight, Sir-Niebolas Calico applying his Per- ſon.to.my..Mother, was;the. Author of, Sir, Your humble: Servant. - Bell. So the Letter-fays. Cr. The-Letter -contains-. Verity... Zell.; Pox, 1 ſhall. be teaz'd.... - > Gr. -One thing: more. Sir, 1 am-a Perfon that as to ltd an ite the circumſtances of : —— 1-lovd-ia th? 1ndies,-a fair, Chriſtian Curioſity ,and a nauſeous Zndian Baggage, had a-mind-to- apply,co-my Perſon her. Tawny Cir- - cumſtances z and. "find! ing ſhe cou'd not. obtain her yes *pplys bee: Flt to. an Indian. Bawd, and Bewitches-me--- * we, : Bell, Pſhaw !. Bewitc'd! what ſtuffs here? — (aſide S "Ie" | Cr. Bewitches me Sir, what follows thereupon ?--aJ 7 in-me + I abhbor-Women.; fallinto er gon penigal, ; n NW Emes: yy kt Tae no \ _.. Bell. You. ſhall not Sire... +. 4 + by POIED: © IR Cr... Pray my Lord, no Women... .. OE _ I + Bell; Yie.warrant you Sir. re hg .Cr.-Rut -as.;mvuch. QuPPer- as you pleaſe .my j Lord. Bell-You. ſhall Sir. | Ks _ Cr. You-are. highly civiliz?d, ; 9 ER Os $07 Map. 1 told 'Your Honour-he had | ſuch odd ways 2 dl My ad. 6 as ſos as: the: Ship. is.come up the-River, which wHl be-in. few days, 'te bring the Gap tain. to; wait-upgn» Your Lordſhip, : with the account -of- Sir Thomas his Eſtate, Aboard ';-which-will-amount. to-Forty, thouſand pound, belides Ten thouſand pound he has. brought a ſhore in rough Diamonds: ' So, My'Lord, __ very humble: Servant. Sir Thomas your Servants L leave. you in. E90g hands. Cr. Your Servant, SIE --- Bell. Ple: order things for you: I muſt diſpoſe- this Man auitkly, for” m rey weary. of him, and alſo impatient.to go about+my._ Aﬀeairs. - - Leo. *Tis he—Pm ſure tis he—- Sg peeps. ) Bell; How now Siſter ? what's your buſineſs here ? Leo. Staring;at this ſtrange ſort o?-Man. Bell. You were no Woman elſe — pray get fromhim ſpeedily. Leo. You are-not. jealons.of.a Mad-man ſure ?. he's mad is he not ? TL Bell. Yes, and impertinently- brings me :vexation -too from the Indies, at a time when, I've enough at home, as every Man has, that beeps a Woman. Pray get from him, he hates to ſee Women. -. (Exit.)- | _ Leo. Hates to ſee Women * ? ha!ha! Sir Ti bomat Calico your humble 'Servant, E Ms Jy
26 1 Sir Courely Nice + | you are welcome from the Indies z but have a care of being diſcovyer'd leaſt you be under the circumſtances of a Cudgel.
Cr. Truly Madam, I exped to have ſomething ſtick by my ribs preſently, that is to ſay a good Supper ; which I have order'd. My Lord and I will ſup together, and- you and Mr. Farewel.
Feo. We ſup together ? where ? in the Grave? a fatall accident has hapned, will bring us both thither. My Brother has found Mr. Farewel's Picture in my Chamber,
Cr. He ſhall not keep it, he ſhall-deliver both Pictore and jealouſie.
Leo. Then thou art a Maſter. I told him my Woman found it in Weſtminſter- - {Abby ; may be thou may*ſt make ſomething out o* that ?
Cr. Stay let me conſider Weſtminſter- Abby, or the Abby of Weſtminſter——ym——
um— Let me alone— be gone— he comes. | (Exit Leo.) | = Enter Bell.
Bel. Come Sir, let me wait on you to your Chamber.
Cr, Hold, my Lord, a word, I have buſineſs of great conſequence, I muſt hum- bly apply to your underſtanding. | | |
Bell. So, F muſt be hindred with more Non-ſence. ( aſide.)
Cr. Pre in the Indies, a delicate peice of my Fathers Rib, 1 beg your Lordſhip to advife me in the diſpoſal. |
Bell. Oh ! diſpoſe it how you pleaſe, Sir. : b
Cy. ”Tis a Siſter I. mean, Sir.
Bell. Oh ! that's ſomething.
Cy. She's fweet and flender as a Clove, and is worth two Millions o? Coxcombs— Three:-hundred of ?em comes to Three Farthings ;*tis a Chineſe Mony. This Mony makes her much ſought in Marriage : The great Hobbommoccoes o' the Indies come
 gallopping upon Elephants, Camels, Rhinoceroſes, and Oxen to ſee her. Now my Father was under the circumſtances of great obligation, to a Gentleman in Exg- land ; and out oO? gratitude to him, ordered me on his Death bed,. to beſtow my Siſter on his Son, and Heir, if his ations have any ſort o? fmile in %era to his incompatible Father, which is the query. Pray reſolve it. vhs
Bel. Firſt tet me know the Gentleman.
Cr, You ſhall, le give you a Map, of his Face,a Pitusecontain*d inmy pocs - ket.— ha — I ha? loſt it, — F ha? loſt it. — |
Bell. Tell me his Name, Sir. :
Cy, I ha? dropt it out 0* my pocket.
Fell. F, but his Name. .
, Cr. I ha? dropt it out 0? my pocket. |
Bell. Ha? you dropt his Name out o' your pocket ? his Name Sir ? © Oy. Oh his Name, I'le tell you«both his Name, and Cogname. His Name is . A<narew, his Cogname Farewel. |
Bel. Farewel ? what comes into my. head ? Sir can. you-gueſs where you might . looſe. this. Picture ? |
Cr. A gueſs may be obtain'd-—by the Prayers of Marriners——
Bell. No other way * thoſe I ſeldome here off. —— .-
Cr. 1} was drawn down —— ſtay let me ſee— remembrance begins to be , idle—— has Loudon no place in the Weſt 2 | 2m by Br oth Cr, ty;
Cr. Ay, but ſomething very wet ? "tac calf Weſt?
Bell. Yes — there's Weſt-Smirbfield.
Cr. That's not th* appellative. Is there no Monſter in the Weſt, calÞd Weftmonſter ?
Bell. Weſt minfter I believe you mean.
Cr. Y'ave nick'd it. To Weſtminfter 1 rode, to behold the Glorious circum- ſtances o' the Dead ; and diving into my pocket, to preſent the repreſenter with a Gratification, I am fully confirmd, 1 then loſt it; for my Eyes and the Picture had never any | rencounter fi nce.
Bell, This exactly agrees with my Siſters ſtory, what a Prodigious. thing is this ! ? adiſcovery 0? my Siſters innocence, ſent to me from th' 1naes, in a 'heap oY —_ ſence? and inſo Critical a minute z excellent Providence ?
. What's an excellent Providence, Sir, that I ha' loſt my PiQture ?
Bel No Sir, that I ha? found your Piqure.——
Cr. Found my Piure ?
Bell Ay, Sir, *swas found by a Friend o? mine, in Weſtminſter- Abby — there it I8.—
Cr. Oh! my Picture! — my Pifture ! — my Piture! —
Bell, Oh! my eas'd heart!
Cr, Oh! my PiQure! my Piture! my pretty Piure !
My Lord I muſt requite this favour, open that Casket, and — my Lord a handful of Diamonds.
Zell. A handful o' Diamonds.
Cr. Ay, my Lord, I beg your Pardon for the inconſiderableneſs o' the Preſent:
Bell. Inconfiderableneſs ? what a Market wou'd ſome make 0? this Man?= put up your Diamonds.
Cr. By no means, my Lord.
Zell. Put *em up Sir, or you'l diſſoblige me.
Cr, You overwhelm me with Favours, I wiſh I had yu at my houſe ig Bantam. A
Bell. 1 thank you, Sir; we are better where we are:
Cr. My Lord, you put me under the circumſtance o* bluſhing.
Bell. Pray let me put you into a Chamber, to reſt your ſelf.
Cr. Reſt is good — yours humbly —
Bell. Yours as humbly— What a Fire did I kindle in my houſe, to clear the. _ Air of a Peſtilence, was not init? my Siſter and all my Family are innocent. But what a fantaſtick thing is Womens Honour ? |
WhiPſt She enjoys it, *tis not ſeen or kriown, FLnd yet when Aeon She's utterly undone.
(.Exennt Ounes,
E 2
28 Sir Courtly Nice :
A cT. IV.
' The Scene continues. Enter Violante and Leonora laughing.
Vo. H\. ha ! ha ! what an excellent” Fellow 1s this? what Engines he has in his head ? not only to wind him ſelf into my Lords houſe, but the PiQure out of his hands ?
Leo: He undertakes to bring Mr. Farewel hither to Night. If he engag'd to bring him in a Church with a Parſon to marry us, I wou'd not doubt it.
Vio. Certainly my Lord muſt be in a moſt mortified humour ; now is the time to ſcarify him, and rake out his Worm.
Leo. Here he comes, now will I cary my ſelf with all the inſolence of a Virtuous Woman. | Enter Lord Belguard.
| So my Lord, have your Slaves becn gathering any more ſcatter*d ſmiles o* mine ? what loads o? that Gold Sand have your Aſſes brought home ? \
Bell; They have heard all, now.I am aſham'd to ſhew my Face.
Vie. Come, my Lord, wou'd you confine a Woman of Honour ? give her Liberty ; wou'd you corrupt her ? confine her.
Dro.'* Tis trac ; were 1 a 'Wife- to ſuch a Man, ! ſhoau'd abuſe him out of Pride ; and think my ſelf not an ill but a great Woman, ſince to puniſh is a mark of Princely Dignity.
Bell, This I confeſs is the Engliſh Dialea; and when I talk of Governing Women, I talk of a thing not underſtood by our Nation. Fadmire how. it came about, that we who are 'of all Nations, the moſt wiſe and free in other reſpects,  Mhou'd be theonly Slaves and Fools to Women. |
Vio. Oh! you are the Wiſeſt of all Nations, you know Jet Men do what they can, Women will do what they pleaſe ; and whereas other Nations by their ſpies and Governantes are at great toyle and charges to be Cuckolds,you have it for nothing. | 5; tas Come Brother,  6o not dreſs me in a Fools Coat, nor hang ſpies about me, like ſo many gingling Bells, to give notice of all my motions. I can count, and know that one and one, put ſhamefully together, are two lewd Fools, and not one happy pair, as ill Women reckon, and deceive themſelves.
Bell. Siſter 1 believe you Virtuous, but I wou\d have you not only be Virtuous but thonght ſv. And truly a Waman. may be Virtuons, but is ſeJdome wiſe in Meps company. Her vain honour will put her on new Conqueſts. and Womens Conqueſts are pretty things; they often end like thoſe of Highway men, ina ſhameful Execution en there own Perſons. And yet all the buſincſsof their Vives is muſtering up Forces. To day the Beauty Lyes ambulh'd in undreſſes, the hair pin'd up in Papers, like Serpents coyl'd to fly on you with greater force; the Garments are looſe and flowing as the Sea, to ſhew a.#5 1s there. 'T'o
morrow ſhgs as regularly fortified as a Loy-Country-Towng and oft a party of RW EPO | __ Charme
Charming looks are ſent abroad to put all Spectators under a contribution, Fo. - Your Wife muſt not, dreſs ?
Or, it" cannot”Bec 29
" Bell. Why ſhou'd ſhe? I think Womens Poynts and | Embroyderies but 'Y
many Billet-doux in Needle work.
Yio. She muſt not go abroad or ſee a Play.
Bell. Yes, She may £06 to Plays, provided ſhe'l ſee Plays and not Fools, it may beenter into Converſation with *em, and in ſtead of getting Wit from the Plays, get Folly from the Fops; and ſo her Wit being ſpoyI'd in her Youth, and like a. Clock fet wrong in the Morning, go falſe "all the. day affer. In ſhort, no Wife or Siſter of mine ſhall dabble in converſation with any Man; [
hate a Slattern in her credit. [ Enter Surly peeping. Sar. P my conſcience I think ] hear Pelgzard and his Miſtreſs quarrel in goo carneſt. [aft ae. ]
Vio, Let no Woman marry a Man o' your humour, but ſhe that for her Crimes
is condemn'd to Transpor tation. The Slave that in Firginia toyls to plant her -
Lord Tobacco, is not more Miſerable, than ſhe that in your boſom -Lahours to plant a good opinion ;, both drudge for Smoak. I ſcorn the Slavery, nor. will marry a King to encreafe his Dominions, .but to ſhare *em.
Bell. I offer you the entire Dominion 0? my ſelf; only deſire you, not toaim
at further conqueſts. Vie. 1 ſhou'd be a fine Soveraign, where Jealouſie, Pride, Rage, and ſuch 2
ſawcy Committee ſhall give me-Laws; which they wou'd never. do to a Prince they lov'd. p Bell. T think Pye given conyincing, Proofs of Love. . _
Fio. When ? Bell. When I offer'd, Madam, to take you for better. and for worſe ; thoſe
are Heroical Complements. The form of Matrimony out does Ovid for pal- ſionate expreſlions.
Vio. Ay, my Lord, but that's none o? your Wit, and I_ wou'd not have a 7
Man ©? your parts, ſteal. other Mea's Phraſes ; ; fo your Lordſhips_ humble Scr- vant, Come away Child, (Exit Vo. and Leo. I Emer Surly.
Sir. Rare! they'r partcd 3. once a Woman 1} poke truth. My Lord, your Ser= vant. Ive overheard your quarrel, and I honour you, you are the only Man in the Nation that nnderſtands kimſelf. Lock up the Women til} they'r mu- ſty, better they ſhowd have a Hogo, than their Reputations. And their Honours are not like their. Smocks, whitened by Ling abroad.
Bell. Nor have their ador'd Faces the more eſteem, for ' often appearing.
Sur. Pox on *em, they varniſh like Copper, and the Women are ſenſible of it,
that's thz reaſon they forge new Faces excry time they go abroad ;. and- all- the Ne Arts of Paint and dreſs are ſaborn'd-to givea Baſtard beauty Title to Reign, -
becauſe the Legitimate Face is fillen into contempt by familiarity. ,No more ta be ſaid, keep your ground like a raan of honour 3 and looſe yourMiſtreſs. like
A Coxcomb.— (afiae. )* | ( Ex#.”) | Entcr a Servant,
Ser. ,An'c pleaſe youf Honour, Mr. HZ»head and Mr, Ti FIR are return'd, ' - as your Honour EavC orders. | 'E | | . nter
%
"Sir Courtly Nice :
. yo 0 @ - oh ' Enter Teſtimony. i |
Bell. That's well—ceme Mr. Teſtimony ; here has been a miſtake gave me a | harſh opinion of you——Pm ſorry for't.
. Teſt. Oh! my Lord, have a care of cenſuring Profeſiors— for a Profeſſor,—.
Bell. Nay, prethee don't profeſs too much. * I am fatisfied with thee. |
"Teſt. Truly you would, if you knew of what a tender Spirit I am of. I was only deluded the other day into a Play houſe, and truly it will be a burden to my Spirit whilft ] live. | Bell, Alack a day, well I hope you'l be the more tender of my Siſter, your trouble will not be long. I have engag'd her to a Gentleman, whom about this time 1 expett. What a clock is it ?
Tejt. Truly I do believe it is about Four, I cannot fay it poſitively ; For I - wou'd not tell a Lye for the whole World.
Bell. This is an excellent Fellow, -if he be what he pretends. (Knocking,
Hark fome one at the Door ——may be "tis he—--ſee.
Enter Hothead.
- Hot. Did you ſend for me, my Lord ?
. Bell. Ay, Couſin, toreconcile my ſelf to thee; I was in a miſtake.
Hor. Ithink you was, when you judg'd a Raſcally Fanaticka better Man than T.
Bell. The Contrary Couſin, —1 think thee ſo much the better Man, I keep thee to have an eye over him, becauſe I dont know if he be a Knave. Bs
Hot, Not know if a Fanatick be a Knave ? You'r fit to fit in the Houſe 0) Peers I faith. |
Bell, Well, thou art a very honeſt Fellow Coufin— let me have thy Company. But what are thoſe Patches on thy Face, for Ornament ? |
Hot. They are for Plaiſters, but they are Ornaments. I have been in a Fa- '+watick Coffee-Houſe, and this is the Beauty they gave me.
Bell. *T'was to reward ſome honourable Names, thou gav'lt *em.
Hot. 1 gave *em no wrong names. I] call'd *em Rognes indeed, but that's - their proper Name ; and they all ſet their hands to it immediately, and ſubſcrib'd themſelves Rogues upon my Chops, the only true Narrative they ever writ.
Bell. Thou are a mad Fellow. —prethee go in.
Exit Hot. at one Door. Enter at another Teſtimony.
Belt, Well—who's at the Door ?
Teſt. A lamentable Soul.
Bell. A Begger ?
Teſt. A more ſad Obje& z but I conceive he comes rather to rob than beg, for he comes Arm'd with a ſtrong Bow and Arrows. |
Bell, A Bow and Arrows? what, is he a Tartar ?
Teft. A Bow and Arrows made of Ribbons, Laces, and other idle Vanities, -Wherewith he intends to wound your Siſter's heart. | Zell. Oh! the canting Coxcomb.
Teſt. Nay, why canting Coxcomb ? Bell. Be gone you ſenceleſs Aſs; and bring in the Gentleman. Teſt. Nay, why ſenceleſs Aſs ? this is unſeemly. Bell, He wont ſtir. ; | | Te. Iam no ſencelefs Perſon —l ha? more ſences than- your ſelf ; 1 _ a . | | ſence +
| Or, it cannot Be. : FE- ſence o” Vanity; and of the nothingneſso? the things o! this World—Zand a - ſence o! Sin, and a ſence ©? the- infinuating nature 0” Sin—T dare not Þrine - this wanton frothy. young Man to your Siſter—-for ſhe is frothy alſo —and ſin will get in at a little cranny and if fin once get in his head, hel ger in all his whole body. New your honour has not that ſence 0 theſe" thingy - you ought to have. That your Honour is a ſenceleſs Perſon, | Bell, How Sirrah ? — Teſt. Tna ſpiritual ſenſe.—— | > _—_—_— | Bell, There's no getting this preaching Fellow away-——Coufin Hiorheac; + ; Enter Hothead. I
Hot. My Lord. Bell. Why do you let. this canting Coxcomb plague me ?
Hot. Why do you keep ſuch a canting Coxcomb ? let him plague you, Pox + you, and Damn you, I don't care. Y Teſt. Oh ! ſad ! oh! ſad! Hot. Oh! ſhad ! oh! Sot! Bell. So, now I've brought %m both upon me. Hot. He*s always tuning his Noſe, too high too low, like a Sowgelders Hotn: Bell, Well Sir, if you pleaſe, tell me who's at my Door ? h - Hot. Forty One is coming in ding dong. Bell. Into My Door ? who's at my Dgor, 1 fay ? Hot. Old Forty One, I'faith. fe Bell.: ] cannot have an anſwer—-Sirrah——wha's at my Door ? Teft. Popery, I'm ſure is: coming in. : Bell. Into my Door? I] ask you, who's at my Door ? - Teft. Popery P'm fare. | Hot. Roguery I'm ſure. Teft. Popery I'm ſure. Hht. Roguery I'm fure. Bell. Confound you - both. Hot. And confound you both. | __.. ( Bell. rarns them both ont.) - Bell. You Boy, is there any oneat Door ? . ( to a Page.) | Pa. Yes my Lord. + by | Bell. So, this Boy can-anſwer , whoisit ? © *® Pa. Sir Courtly Nice, my Lord. | | . Bell. Oh ! theſe Rogues, have they made. him wait all this white ? introduce him '” quickly. He comes molt ſeaſonably to rid me of my plague, now Pm very ſick oft. Enter Sir Courtly: and the Page; bowing to one another. Dear Sir-Courtly, my Servapts did not tell me who you were, that I have ig» - ' norantly: made you wait, I am aſham'd to ſee you... ; Sir Co. Your Lordſhips moſt hamble Servant. Bef. Your very 'humble Servant.——Page — call-my Siſter. Exter. Aunt and' Leonora. - | = Sir Co. Madam your moſt — 4 goes t0 Salnte. Leo." Au. Sir Courtly your very humble Servant. Aunt feeps firſt. -_ Sir Co. Oh! your Ladyfhips very humble Sefyant— ( Salmes Aunt. A, Your moſt humble- Servant. | | JE = | ir C6, = ;
a” Pg
32 ; dif Courtly 'Nice : - Sir C9. Now Madam, your moſt humble Servant. ( to Leo.) Az. Aa incomparablefine Gentleman. : Bell. Well, Sir Courtly, now Pve brought you thus far 0' your way to my Siſters Inclinations ; Ple leave you to purſue the reſt o' your Journey by your ſelf; you need no guide to Ladies hearts. . Sir Co. Oh! your moſt humble Servant. | Ax. No, Sir Courtly commands all. If ny Neice does not receive you, Sir Courtly, in all the obliging manner in the World, *cis for want of experience and underitanding merit—lle aſſure you, Sir Courtly, I whor have ſome lit- tle more judgment, have had a very particular value for you, Sir, from the firſt - Minute 1 had the honour to ſee you, Sir. Sir Co. Oh?! Madam, your moſt humble Servant. - Au. A very particular-—— | i Sir Co. Oh! your moſt humble Servant. | Au. And if my Neice has not, it proceeds from her want of Years to know De- ſert. And indeetl all Youth is indiſcreet, 1 wou'd by no means adviſe a Gentleman of Merit, to marry any Perſon, that has not ſome Years and experience upon her.— Rell: She's ſetting up for her ſclf I think. Aunt. — Au. Nephew —- Bell. Pray leave the Lovers together. Az. Sir Conrtly, your moſt humble Servant. _ Sir Co. Madam, your moſt humble Seryant. | fu, Pray, Neice, behave your ſelf ſo to Sir Courtly, as at leaſt to do me right z and by all your expreſſions and behaviour, he may know how very particular an honourl have for him. . Bell, She has for him ? —  ( afide.) Au. Moſt particular, — Bell, Pray Aunt in particular. — come with me— An, Very particular — Sir Co. Oh! Madam — Madam-— Bell Aunt— © | Ay. Yes Nephew-— Sir Courtly, Tam exceeding unwilling to leave you to the Converſation of a young Lady, whoſe Ycars Pm afraid wi!l not aiford her Wir enough to entertain ſo fine a Gentleman, — Sir Co. Oh! Madam ! Madam ! Madam ! Au. But Ple retuxn with all ſpeed poſlible.— Bell. But you ſhall not, if I can help it==— ( aſide. ) Au. And fo your very humble Set vant. Sir Co. On, Madam © your moſt humble Servant. ( Exit Aunt and Bel. ) Leo. Now will I manage him, humour him—pretend to admire him—to draw him Into love, laugh at him and revenge my ſzIfon him, for plaguing m2. ( aftae. ) Sir Co. Now, Madam, is the glorious opportunity come, which my Soul has long with'd, to expreſ3 tow much 1 admire, adore— | -Leo.. Ol! Sir Conrtly —- | Sir Co. Extravagantly adore ! —> EF . Leo. Oli! Sir Courtly -— I cannot receive all this. | Sir Co. Oh! Madam, is tl.cre any thing on the Earth fo chu ming ? — I.ne- | | Ys Tr
[1
Or, 1 cannot Be, -33
yer ſaw any thing ſo fine as your Ladyſhip, ſince I was born. - Leo. Fye, Sir Conrtly —- Sir Co. Never ſince I was born— Leo. You?l kill me with bluſhing, | Sir Co. | fpeak my Soul —Heavens! what Divine Tecth there are ? Leo. Fye! fye ! I ſhall never open my mouth more. * Sir Co. Then: you'l undoe all the World. Oh! there?s nothing ſo charming . as admirable Teeth. If a Lady faſtens,ygon my heart, it muſt be with her Teeth. Lco. That's a pleaſant Raillery——ha.! ha ! ha !  [ feigns a fookſblaugh. Sir Co. Oh! Madam,I rope your Ladyſhip has a better Opinion 0? my good Manners — Railly a Lady o' your quality ? Leo. Oh ! you Wits, turn all things into ridicule, Sir Co. Madam, I never was ſo ſerious fince I was born ; therefore I beſeect; your Ladyſhip have pitty upon me.— I ſwear and vow if you do nor, I ſhall dye. Leo, Dye ! ha! ha! you Wits wil be raillying. Sir Co. Heavens, Madam / how ſhall ] convince you, I am ſerious ? Leo. Really, Sir Courtly, I ſhou'd be very ſorry if you be ſerious. Sir Co, Qh! Heavens ! why ſo Madam ? : Leo. Becauſe Tis pitty fo fine a Gentleman ſhould loſe all his Gallantry— Siz. Co. Now you frighten me, Madam. Js it impoſſible for me to attain the Glory of your inclinations ? Leo, It will be impollible for me to keep the Glory of your inclinations, Sir Conrtly ; 1o I dare not venter on 'em. | ; Sir Co. On! as to that, Madam, Ile ſwear Eternal conſtancy, eternal ſervices, and all thoſe things. | Leo. You are not in your own power, Sir Coxrtly. You fine Gentlemen, like fine Countries, aredeſir*d and ſought by all, and therefore in a perpetual War. If I ſhou'd plzce my heart in you, it wow'd not have a minutes quiet, A thouſand” Potent Beauties wou'd every day aſlault you, and you'd yield out o? Complai- ſance, your good Breeding wou'd undo me. Sir Co. Oh Madam, this is extremity o? Gallantry ; your Ladyſhip puſhes things to a ſtrange height. Leo. I ſpeak my Soul. Beſides I've another hnmour, but that's a Fozblef will ridicule me. | Sir £o. Oh! Madam. Leo. Nay Ile confeſs it. I am ſtrangely curious — extravagantly curious— I nauſcate a Perfume if it ever ſaluted any Noſe but my one. ; Sir Co. Oh ! fortunate / my own humour. | Leo. Nething muſt come near me, that was ever once touch'd by another. Sir Co. Is it poſlible ? | | _ Les. Not if you'd give a Hundred pound. Sir Co. My own Phraſe too, Pve obſerv*d it int my ſelf, Pme ſtrangely for- tunate—=we ſhall be fond to an infinite degree. ( aſide. ) Leo. For that reaſon, your fine Gentlemen is my averſion, he's ſo tempted by all Ladies, ſo Complaiſant to all Ladies, that ro marry a fine Gentleman, is to accept the leavings of a Thouſand Ladies. $17 Co. Oh! Madam ! you ha? met with the Creature you deſire 3; —1I =o | EF | ronch'
$
34 Sir Courtly Nice + touch'd Woman ſince I was born. | Leo. That's pleaſant, I believe you have ruin'd a thouſand, Sir Co. Not one upon my Soul. Leo. *Tis impoſlible. | . Sir Co. Oh! Madam ? there's not one Lady in a thouſand I can Salute. I . only touch the tip. o? their ear with my Cheek. | | Leo. Fye | fye! : | Sir Co. Not one Lady ina Million, whoſe breath I can endure. But I con'd not go into their Beds, if you'd give me*#thonſand pound. T-con?d not come into the Ayr of any Bed in Ergland.but my own, or Your Ladyſhips, if you'd give me all the World. ; Leo. This isall Gallantry, Sir Cour:ly. You have been told this is my humour Sir Co. Is it really, Madam ? 4 Leo. Oh above all things. I ſuffer nothing to come near my. bed, but my Gentlewoman. Sir Co. Nor I, but my Gentleman. He has a delicate hand at making a Bed, he was my Page, L bred him up.-to.it. | Leo. To making Beds ? Sir Co. Ay, Madam, and I believe, he'l make a.Bed with any Gentleman in . England; | . | , Leo. And my Woman has a great Talent. Sir Co. Is it poſſible ? Ladies commonly employ ordinary Chamber-Maids—- with RAT Rgrons on, made by fluttiſh Women that ſpit as they —ſpin—tfol!: Leo.. Foh !  S#r. Co. Your Ladyſhip will pardon me— my Linnen is all made in Fol- lard, by neat. Women that dip their Fingers in Rofe-water, at my. charge. Leo. Delicate. Syzr. Co. And all waſh'd there. Leo, And ſo is mine at Hearlem.” Sur. Co. At. Hearlem, 1 hold a conſtant correſpondence with all the Eminent, \Waſhers there. | Leo. That's delicate, and agrees wonderfully with my humour. Sir Co. Oh ! happy } we ſhall be fond to an infinite degree. | 4 Emer Surly. Leg. Oh ! foh ! here's,that beaſtly rude Clown Mr. S#rly.. Sir Co. Oh ! foh ! what ſhall we do with him ?- Sur. How now ?. how now ? you twd are intimate——heark you,. Madam. Leo. Oh! foh! | Sir Co, Foh |! Sur. Foh! what's this fohing at ?- Sir Co., No body Mr. Szrly.; only at preſent-we are- accoſted with an ungrates:
 fal:mell.
Sar. Yes, I ſmell an ungratefull ſmell, your Roguery. Madam, I employ'd this .
 Fgllow to ſpeak for me, and I'le be hang d if. he be. not falſe to. me...
| Leo. Yo ſpeak for him? ha ! ha 7: Sir Co. Ay, for him, Madam, ha ! hal: , =: Ay, Jor me Nickumpoop. —_ SIT Co.
Or, it catinds -Be, 75 Sir Cs. Your humble Servant. Sir, y*are very civil. | Sar. So I am, that Ido not execute thee for this theft upon the place ; but thou plead'ſt thy Face, as Whores do their Bellys ; xis big with Fool. Sr. Co. Very civil—Sir. | | Sur. Sure, Madam, a Woman o? your ſence, will not chuſe him before me. He has more Land ? not more improv'd Land. His Acres run up to one great
3 >
Weed, 1 mean himſelf; and there it Bloſſoms iu Periwigs and Ribons. Oh! _
but he has a finer Perſon ! that's a Cheat ; a falſe Creed impos'd on you, by a General Councilof Taylors, Milleners and Semſtreſles ; let my hat expound his Face, and you'l ſee whata peiceo* ſimple ſtuff it is.
Sir Co. Horrid ! he has put his beaſtly Hat upon my Head —pray Sir do me the favour to remove 1t, or I ſhall grow very ſick— (to a Ser, )
Sur. Sick ? I hope thou wilt eat my Hat. Now, madam, you ſee what a cheat he is, and whether he deſerves any more favours, then to be decently hang'd with the reſt of kis Brothers. |
Sir Co. My Brothers hang'd, Mr Surly ? |
Sir, I mean the PiQures in the Hangings, for they and thou are all but Needle- work ; and thou would'ſt ſerve for a piece o? Tapſtery, but for a Husband, Lord ha? Mercy on thee. |
Sir Co, Your Servant Mr. Surly. You are a very well hred, Gentleman, Sir, and Pay great Veneration to a Lady o' Quality, and your Miſtreſs—ha ! ha ?
Leo. His Miſtreſs? ha ! ha !
Sir Co. Let's rally him to death, Madam --ha! ha l!—
Sur. Rally ? does the ridiculous Fignre pretead tolaugh at any thing ?
Sir Co. Dee? hear, Madam ? Ea
Leo. Sir Courtly, you are a Vartyr to good manners, and ſuffer out o? reſpe& to me,. more then is fit for a nin to bear. «
Sur. Hea man.? I ha* ſeen a Burler make a better thing out of a Diaper Napkin.
Sir Co. Your moſt obliged humble Servant— Sir.
Leo. Sir Qurtly, I'le withdraw, that you may do your ſelf Juſtice— and be
kick'd— ( aſide.) Sir Co. Your Ladyſhips moſt humble Servant. Leo. Vie no longer prote& ſuch a Coxcomb— as your ſelf. (aſide.)
Sir Co. Your very humble Servant, Madam ; Ile puſh his Soul «ont preſently.
Leo. Oh! don't do him that favour, Sir, only corre& him. -
Sir Co. Well, Madam, what your Ladyſhip pleaſes — :
Your Ladyſhips very humble Seryant. - ( Exit Leo, ) | Mr. Surly, I have receiv'd ſome- favours from you, Sir, and I deſire the Honour
of your Company, Sir, to Morrow morning at Barn-Elms, Sir,— pleaſe to name
your Weapon, Sir. Sar, A Squirt. Sir Co. A Squirt ? Sur. Ay, for-that will go to thy heart, I'm ſure. Sir Co. Well, Sir, I ſhall kiſs your hands. ; : Sur, kifsany Breech. — | - (Ext. ) . Sir Co. Beaſt, Clown, Fool, Raſcal. Pox take him-—— what ſhall I do with bim.? it goes againſt my ſtomach horribly ro fight ſuch a Beaſt, If his filthy =» + 2
\
*
Swotd
36 Sir Courtly Nice +
Sword ſhou'd touch me, *twou'd make me as ſick as a Dog. | Scene a Garden. Enter Cr. and. Leonora. Leo. Ha! ha! I'le ſecure the Coxcomb— get him confin'd upon the
Guard, among Tobacco takers, and that will copfine. him to his Bed and Ba-
nio's for one Month. : Cr. That will do rarely. About this time I expe&t Mr. Farewel, I ha” ſent for
your. Brother to introduce- him. Leo. My Brother ? | : Cr.. Your Brother I ſay, to ſhew my skill. Retire, and ſtay conceeFd in the: {_ Exit Leo,
Garden. Here your Brother comes. | Enter Pelguard.
Now for lies and nonſence to entertain this jealous Brother till the Lover comes. Bell. Sir Thomas your Servant, what's your will with me !
Cr. Talk—] love talk— begin.
Bell. Very pithy.
Cr. In what Circumſtance are we ?
Bell. Circumſtance ?
Cr. Ay, what call you this, where we are ?
Bell, A Garden. Cr. A Garden? I've ſeenin the /ngies a Melon as big.
Bell. As all this Garden ? |
Cr. Bigger. |
Bell, we lyed of a Mad-man. ( aſide. ) Are all your Fruit ſo large ?
Cr. All. h
Bell. Your Nutmegs and Pepper are not.
Cr. Your Hiſtory is erronious. We have Nutmegs as big as ſmall -Fly-boats, I
have ſaiPd a hundred Leagues in a Nutmeg.
Bell. Well lyed. ( aſide)
Cr. Our Oyſters have wonderfull conference.
Bell, Circumference I ſuppoſe you mean,
Cr. Y*ave. nick'd it. Three of %m block up a Harbour . 'Tis our way of.
Mortification. — Bell. Fortification. Cr. You are in the right—Pox on'c I have been ſo long abroad, I have al-
moſt forgot my Mother-tongue. | Well —when will this Lover come ? *tis near the. hour, and delicatcly dark. ( aſade ) |  Farewmew ] Murder ! murdcr ! murder ! [ claſhing of [ Swords...
within. 7] I | Cr. That? he ! he's come! (aſide. ) murder cry*d out.
Bell. and at my Coach-houſe Door ? A "Farewel ] Oh 7 Cowardly Rogues Four upon one, m3 & within, ] Bell. A Gentleman aſlaſlinated ?. LO ' Cr. Open the Door,
&cll Who's there ?
( Exit. )
| Enter @ Servant. | Ser. M Lord; : - ef. O1Y . ; Bell,
. Or, it cannot Be.” ——
Bell, Call ſome 0? the Servants to aſſiſt a Gentleman, ſet upon at my Coach- Houſe Door.
Cr. Ay——quick—quick | | ( draws. )
Bell. How, Sir Thomas ? will you venture among %m ?
Cr. Dee" think I wont ? a Gentleman and not fight ?
', Bell, I muſt not ſuffer ir, you may be hurt.
Cr. No Sir, Ple fight like a Gentleman ; le come by no hurt I'le warrant
you.—Come quick—quick—— open the Door — Enter Servants,
Now ſound a Trumpet, Tivy—tivy—tan tan—tivy—Tone,-Pox on't "tis a Horn —1Idon't know a Horn, I ha' forgot every thing belongs to a Gentleman... — among *em helter skeller ——— _ S Exit Bel. Cr. and Ser. meanwhile
| ; Farewel ſteals into the Garden. Le Enter Leonora and her Woman.
Les. I my Conſcience this is Cracks deligne to let in Mr. Farewel.
Fa. Dear Madam, you are in the right.
Leo. Mr. Farewel ? I know your VOICC——
Fa. Oh ? Madam, I adore you for this bounty,
_ Leo. And I ſhov'd bluſh for it.
Fa. Why io, Madam ?
Leo. Shou'd a Woman admit a Lover by night at a Back Door into the ſame houſe where ſhe lyes, .and converſe privately with him before Marriage.
Fa, Your Brother admitted me. E
Leo, Tis true indeed, you may thank him for the favour, Ithought your ſuf-- ferings deſerv'd pity, and my Brother wou*'d let me ſhew it, nocther wav.
Fa. A thouſand Bleſſings on you. |
Leo I doubt not but my Honour is very fate in your keeping, 'I wiſh yaur Perſon, were as ſecure in mine. |
Fa., I am glad o' the danger, ſince "is ſome aſſurance o* my Loye.
Leo.. Yi ur Friend Mr. Crack plays his part very well,and I doubt not but he will ſecure us here, 'and conveigh, us hence, bur. then. other. dangers will follow you.
Fa. What are thoſe, Madam ?.
=
Leo; Thedanger of Marrying without a Fortune, my Ten thouſand pound .
is at my Brothers diſpoſe. : Fa. 1 am glad 0? that too, Madam, *cwill ſhew my love is not Mercenary.
Leo. The danger of being laught at by the Wits,' for marrying at all.
Fa. Oh! let the Wits keep the Jilting rotten Wenches, and leave the ſweet : Virtuous Ladies, to us marrying Fools, I can be as well pleas'd. to keep a fine-.-
Wife to my ſelf, as they can be to maintain fine Wenches for all the Town.
' Leo. Nay, your keepinz Men, Keepers like have commonly but the Offals for - their Slavery. Well, the Evening Ayr will bz unwholſome to you,if you ſtay long» -
erin it, you'l be in danger of Thunder and Lightning preſently,- I mean my
Brother ——he comes——follow me—— _ ( Exit Leo: Fa. Wom.J
Enter Belguard, Crack, &c. Cr. What Cowardly Rogues were theſe ? they ran upon our firſt ſallying.. Bell. They had a reaſon, you'r a Lyon. _ : Cr. Ius'dto kill Lyons and Tygers in the Tnaies, as you do Hares and Cones | | ere.
4
a a I nn eye 5” ne en ron emo ——
33 "Sir Courtly Nice : | . here. Ikepta Tyger Warren, I kill'd a brace every morning to-get me a ſtomack, Beb. It was a good one fure, you offer*d dear for it. Well I hope you ha' got no hirt * ; Cr. Yes, ſomething: very ſharp, went quite through my ſtomack. Bell. How ? through your ſtomack ? then you cannot live. - Cr. Yes, if you noint it preſently with a good diſh o? Jelly-broth, and Tent . it with a bone 0? Roaſt-beef. Bell. Is that the wound ? it ſhall be heal'd preſently. Cr. Preſently, for my ſtomack is Captious. Bell. It ſhall be done. Go to my Aunt and defire her to order Sir Thomas his Supper — 4 5. She's not very well, my Lard, and gone to bed. Bell. Then let the Steward do it. Sir Thomas I am/going out and ſhall ſfay Tate. Pray command my houſe—— good Night to you—-— ( Exit.) Cr. Your Servant Sir— you keep a Woman ? — now to the Lovers — where are they ?
| Enter Farewel, Leo. and her Woman. Fa. Here! here! thou Divine Fellow. Cy. So, ſo, kiſs! kiſs! kiſs! — Leo. Before Marriage? | Cr. Ay, for fear you ſhow'd notKkiſs after marriage— well the houſe is our -own, and the Night our own — your Aunts gone to bed, and your Brother a- broad, well Tory-rory, and "tis— a fine Night, we*l Revel in the Garden — '$laves go bring my Supper — quick—quick-— : Ex. Slave and enter with Diſhes : Farewel, Leo. and Crack ſit dows. ] Emer. Siamites and Bantammers, Now a Song and Dance o? your own faſhion-— but ſhut the Garden-Gates — | and look to 'em well for 1'le be private in my pleaſures — | ( 4 Song and Indian Dance. ) So—now to my Chamber—well—there is no publick Officer like your Pimp. — Pimps manage the great buſineſs 0) the Nation. That #s—the Heavenly work 0? propagation. ( Exerunt Omnes. )
"as ©
Scene Cracks Chamber. Enter Fareyel and Crack.
Fa, O*® ! thou Divine Fellow, what joys haſt thou procured me ? Cr. What joys ? Fa All that Innocence con'd afford. Cr. Innocence ? that's Infipid ſtrff. Fa. No Mr. Crack, there's dilference between the A4annah that came from Heaven, and that out of *Pothecaries Shops z a touch of -Zeonmora's hand her 4 | : Hanna
Or, it eannot By, T7
Mamnah from Heaven has all that Man'can fancy. Here ſhe comes. - Enter Leonora. : :
This, Madam, is bountiful after an Evenings Converſation, to afford me @ Morning too. - | |
Leo. We ſhou'd be charitable to priſoners. | | =,
Fa. Tam a Priſoner, but ſuch a happy. one, asa King is when Lodg'd in a Roy-- al Tower, to prepare for his Coronation. My. hour of Coronation draws near, I want only the Church Ceremony and the Oath.
Cr. Mzdam, how dirſt you venture hither by day light ? Leo. My Aunt, and Brother, are both gone abroad. and won*t come home
till XA oon. So all thoſe hours are mine, and now Mr. Crack to requite your Mus - fick I ha” brought ſome o* mine to entertain you. ; A Song — And enter Woman.
Wom. Oh! Madam— undone— your Brother.
Cr. How ? how ? |
Wom. Juſt coming up fairs, to viſit— you Sir Thomas, = _ |
Cr. Pox of his civyJity: Hide, Sir Hide. And do you Women ſhreike ! — ſ\hreike ! and cry out murder. Cr. throws himſelf on the ground and
3 ſcrambles in- diſtraited poſtures after the Women - They ſhrieke— Enter Belguard. o_
Bel: So, here's my Siſter got into the Madmans Room ; and has put him into - a-frantick fit. Oh! the inſatiable curioſity o? Women. .—
Cr. You Whores | —— you bewitching Whores, do you come to bewitch me ? Vke fetch blood from you. | \
Bell. Why wou'd you offer to come hHther, Siſter ?-
Cr. Whar are you, Sir, the King of Bantunz ?
Bell. No Sir, no.
Cr. Oh! the Mop.
Bell. Nor the Mogul.
Gr. What do you then with all theſe Concubines ? — Oh ! T know: you: now, - you'r a fine man, you have put me into brave circumſtances. Did not I deſire you to let me ſee no Women ? and here, you keepa company of rambling Whores: in your houſe, that have pat me into the circumſtances o? diſtraction. 1 was a - top of the Staircaſe taking-a proſpec o? the.Cape of Good-Hope, and theſe Fly- boats camefailing under my Noſe. What do me I ? but leap. down to break - their Necks ? and ha* broke my own I think. 1] am certain, I have broke ſome- - thing, but what I don't know. Pray take me up, and look over my bones, ſee - if -none be miſſing z if they be, Bone for Bone will be demanded.
Bell.” Poor creature ! who's there ? | ,
Cr. Who's there ? will you truſt me to your ſervants! ſo ifa Leg or an Armof mine be broke, they'l leave it behind e'm, and I ſhall looſe it. I] expect all my Eimbs and Bones from youzas you seceived *em. So—come and take account of em. -
Bell. I will — 1 will— | ( Takes bim up. )
Cr.. Oh ! have a care— Oh ! — | | "8 |
Bell. Alas ! I fear he's hurt; your-fooliſh curioſity. ha's done this ? Jid you not '
® + , ?  gape enough upon.him. before ? . oY | Cr.Oh >
dl | Sir Courtly Nice:
Cr. Oh! gently ! gently; /-—ſo.o—ſo-— ( Bell, leades him out. )
Fa. Oh! this pleaſant Rogue ! ha ! ha ! |
- Leo, *Tisan excelent Fellow. As ſoon as we hear my Brother is returning, flip into that paſſage, ?twill lead you to Cracks Bed-chamber. 4 . Entcr Aunt. |
fu. How now Gen:tlewoman? a man wi? you ? Nephew—-Nepnew— — Neptiew. —
Leo. Begone——begon2—through that Entry. |
Ex. ta. ac one Door, at another Enter Belgnard. *
Belt. What's the matter ?
A:. Our family's diſtonourd, diſhonour*'d——here was a fcllow, a hand- fome young fellow wi m7 Neice. Oh / my fleſh! my fleſh.
Leo. Wi" me ?
Ai. Will you deny it Confidence ?
Bet. Who's there ? Hohead, Teſtimony, all of you come hither .
Enter Hothead, Teſtimony.
Tet. What's your honours pleaſure ? |
Bell. Tocut all your throats, you are all Bauds, and Villains.
Hot, Leave me out o' the number you had beft.
Bell. 1 will not Sir, for here was a young fellow wi” my Siſter.
Leo. My Aunt's whimſy and jcalouſie. |
Az. 1 cow'd tread you under my Feect.
Bell, Which way went he ?
Ar. 1ntothat paſſage - he cannot be got furtier, then Sir. Thomas Calicoes Bed chamber. 7
Bell. Lock all the doors, Arm and heſet Sir Thomas Calicoes lodgings.
Leo. This will prove ſuch another wiſe buſivels as the Picture.
Bell. Hold your peace— get you into that room wi? my Aunt. Aunt pray leok to her. (Exit, Bell. Hot. Teſt. &c. )
Az. Vlekeep her, I warrant her=—come in gentlewoman,— you are a
fine gentlewoman.
\ Teo, Oh! my heart trembles-——Heaven inſpire Crack. ( aſide. ) Exit Aunt and Leonora. Scene changes to another Room.
| Enter Farewel and Crack.
| Fa. Oh! curſed fortune.
Cr. Well don't trouble your ſelf. I'le bring you off ſafe.
| Fa. Not. troble my ſelf, when Leoora's honour is in danger? ſhe'l be the
jeſt of every prating Fop, and malicious beauty. |
Cr, Her honour ſhall be fafe too. This bluſtring——Brother ſhall enter- tain you, ———
Fa, witha Blunderbuſs ?
C7, Ay, full o' Claret. Away—away——he comes. |
Ex Fa. and Enter Belguard, Hothead, Teſtimony, ard the Servants arm'd.
Cr. How ? the High and glorious Emperour 0 S$ja7z with all his guards ? Thon mcit invincible Padzcco, Farucco,—nelmocadin— bobbekin——bow—— wow — =ww— Why Coſt thou ſeek to deſtroy us Ereliſh, ſeated oa thy Dotminions by thy own Letters Patents ?: M .
&>.
——_ _ : ack T
- : LE OWN RON. fl POOR ORR - Cena _ pa, ;0S - ng det Is wa Fark 4. : = % - 2 . %Y > Or, it caunat Be, | RR
* _ «- of 1 . - it
Bell» Piſh !—take him away. Cr. Take away our Priviledges? then A tE, to. my Tar, * * Draws bis Dagger, and pretends t0 ſtab bimſelf. Bell. Hold, hold=Sir Thomas—Sir Ti homas,. no. hurt is meant to you.
+ Cr, Moſt Great and Glorious Emperour, | humbly thank, and do humbly Im- -Þ "Plore thee z that thou would'lt command thy Invincible guards, to lay down
their arms, and put us out of our frights, and we'l ſubmit our perſons to thee. This is ſome Inter lopers work. ( afide. * 8 Bell. Pox © this infpertinent Mad——coxcomb? Lay down your, weapons,
may beif we humour kim, he may come to his ſences, and gtve us leave td ſearch
the rooms. ( they lay down their Weapons.
Cr. My Lord Belguard, your moſt humble Servant.
Bell. He's come to himfelf ; that's well. Sir Thomas your ſervant, how do you.
Cr. Alittle diſcompos'd, ſomething has frighted me, and put me intq the circumſtance of a ſweat.
Bell. Pme ſorry for that. Shall I beg leave, to ſarch your rooms for 4 theif that's got in? .
Cr. Pardon's beg/'d ; ſearch muſt not be made; for 1 have a friend Fo, you mnſt not ſce. 'Bell. Wou'd you ard your friend were hang'd. (afede.)
A very- honeſt Gentleman, but very much. addicted-to marriage. 'Tis he Tr I told you, is to'marry my ladian 'Fubs of a Siſter— Mr. Farewel.
Bell. Mr. Farewel ?!
Cr. Ay, hearing of my arrival, and what circumſtance I was in, hover'd all this morning-about the houſe to geta ſight o*-me ; but car'd not to come in, for it ſeems there is enmity between you.
Bell. Tis true, and I wonder how he got in without my knowledge.
Cr. I made him come in. I was throwing my Legs about.in the Hall, and the
door being open, our eyes knock'd immediately, and gave remembrance ſuch
a- bang, that-we ran full ſpeed into the circumſtances of embracing ?
Bell, And pray who ſaw this ?
Cr. Who ſaw ? what care I who ſaw ? 1 care not. if the whole Town ſaw, I'm not aſham'd of owning Mr. Farewel.
Bell. No Sir, but 1 mean which of my family ſaw- ? that I may thank *m for their care.
Cr. Whatdo 1 care for your family ? if I may not bring. a friend into your family, a fart for, your family. |
Bel, Nay be.not angry Sir Thomas, your friend's welcome.
Cr, 1. doubt it not, for I have found you a very. civil Perſon. And now. recollection isaQtive, I far.cy he's the man you take for a theif. *Tis ſo—ha ! ha 7
' ——excuſe'me——ha ! ha!l-— leave is implor'd—ha ! ha /—Brother Farewel.,
( Fa, within ) Brother.
Cr. Come out, and participate 0? laughter.
Bel. So, now have 1 play'd the fool again, vex'd my ſell and wrong'd wy Siſter with my impertinent jealouſies.
Enter Farewel.
Cr. Come- brother —ha! ha ! laugh—but firſt ſalute.
Fa, My Lord, I believe 0p ROY to ſee me here,/and you may 3 I call my : e
# " . Mos
2 + : " s oa p - = = £ = > = 8 A ws 4 $a +
4 4 | ; Sir Conrtly Nice +
| here to' offer you violence, wou*d prejudice my ſelf.
more becauſe my Friend receives fuch generous uſage in it.
ww
ſelf Baſtard, and renotince the blood of my- Family, by coming under your - roof with any deſign, but to'prejudice you, whichar preſent I muſt- acknow- ledge to my ſhame Is not my intention. I viſit my Friend here for his own ſake, and the ſake of a great Beauty, which you ſhall not hinder me of, my Lord.
Bell. 1 will not Mr. Farewel, 1 ſcorn thoſe effeminate revenges. If 1 hurt any... Man it ſhall be with my Sword. | my
Fa. Your Sword, my Lord ? Mm 2
Cr. Hold ? hald. WY 2 | Bell, Ay, any where but here Mr. Farewel, my Houſe is your Sanctuary, and ?
Cr. What a quarrelling's here ? i'my conſcience ] believe, my Lord, *tis be- cauſe you think he came ta ſteal me, I being under whimſical circumſtances, fer I remember you call'd him a Thief. Look you my Loyd, don't fear me, | wont be ſtole——1 know when I'm well. — Brother I'm very well provided for, I want nothing but my Wits; and what do they ſignifie? ifa Man lives like a Gentleman, no matter whether he has Wit or no. |
Fa. Well, my Lord, though I have the misfortune to be your Enemy, I am none to good manners z Pm ſorry I have given your houſe this trouble, and the
. Bell, Nor am I an Enemy to Love, and the fair Sex.- If the Lady you come for loves you, for her ſake I wiſh you ſucceſs. — ' Fa. Now my Lord you vanquiih me. — Cr. He's a brave Man —Faith—— | * Fa. I fancy we ſhall live to be better Friends, at preſent Ple take my leave, — my Lord your Servant. — Bell, Your Servant Sir. OY | Cr. Brother I muſt ſce you down ſtairs. this was a Maſter-piece. ha / ha ? | (Exit Fa, and Cr. ) Bell. Now Iam cool again. Whata flame had your negligence put me into. Here releaſe my Siſter, Pmaſham'd to ſee her ( to 4 Servant. ) Het. Sirrah ? Sirrah ! you did this to make me ſuſpeRed. | Teft. Ay---ay, I muſt be abus'd, becauſe Pm a Proteſtant. "of Hort. A Proteſtant? a Dog. But with ſach Names the Rogues divide the Rab- ble, and make the Nation go like the Devil, upon Cloven Feet. Bell. Hold your prating, and by your future care make amends for your Paſt negligence; your trouble ſhall not be long, within this. Eight and forty hours Ple marry her, or ſend her into'the Country.
Hot. Well--well-- Ple look to her, for the Honour of my Family, not your '
buffing. | .  (Emtt.) Teſt. Ito diſcharge a Conſcience — | -.. ( Extt. ) Enter Leonora-.
| Teo. 0 —Sir— | Hell, My Siſter —- 4 ; ; . 8s. 7 Teo. Do you run from me ? is that the reparation you make for the intole- + 'F* rable wrongs you have done me ? | ( pretends to burſt into tears. ) z Bell. Well, 1 have wrong*d you, I'm forry for it, and beg your Pardon — = I nmuſt be gone— about bulineſs— your buſineſs—= to fetch Sir Conrtly Nice. oF. 7our Servant, Siſter. * (Exit) / ' too, 'S.
Or, It cannot De,
Leo. Oh! youf Servant Sir——ha.! ha /——he' rung——1-may chance Ur to run :
as nimbly from you, if Cracks Wit do not fail him——here he COMegoy Enter Crack. | Thou admirable Fellow, what haſt thou done with Mr. Faremel? Cr.. He's in the Street ſtaying for you. © * Leo, Staying for me ? and can'ſt thou convey me to him? | Cr. Dee queſtion it ? put on a Vizard and rt. over Your Cloths;
Leo. Sweet Roghe. 55 - |
Cr. Nay, nay be gone.
Leo. Delicate Rogue. ;
Cr. Nay, nay he ſtays for you. |
Leo. Incomparable Rogue. |
Cr. P*ſhaw ! put on your Vizard. 1 - 00
Leo. Moſt excellent - Rogue. 5: =
Cr. Oones ! put on your Vizard. T4,
Leo. I will-I will—ha ! ha! coll—loll—derol— -
Cr. goes out, and as Leo. 1s going out ſingin ; and dencing, She's met by Bell. and fog *.. oy
Bel. Oh ! Siſter your tune's alter*d.
Sir Co. Oh! Madam ! I'm happy to find your Ladyſkip,in ſo-gay a humour.
Leo. You'l not find it ſfo— ( aſide. ) |
Bell, Sir Courtly Ile betray - her to you. I left her in Tears upon an unhappy occaſion, and at parting told her I wou'd bring you. Now /you- are come, I d her in joy. Nothing elfe couw'd cauſe the Change. |
Sir Co. .Qh fortunate. |
Leo, Oh Fop.— ( aſide )
Bell, Now improve your Intereſt, and let us ſee how great a Maſter hy are.” |
in Courtſhip, by your dexterous diſpatch. [ leave you together — .. (Exit. )
Sir Co. And npon my Soul 1 will, Oh! Madam,: am I fo Foreman ſoGlori- ,
ous, to be well in your fine inclinations ?
Leo, Oh! fye, Sir Courtly-—if I had anyſuch guilt upon me, do you think .
wou'd confeſs ? Sir Co: You do confeſs Madam—your fine Eyes, and your languiſhing Ayr,
_ and your charming Blnſhes, and all thoſe things—
Leo. 1 hope Icarry no ſuch falſe things about me z for if-they fay. any fuch |
thing they Infinitely wrong me. ” Sir Co. Oh ! -now you are cruel, Madzm ;/ you kill me.  * _ E] Leo. Can you hope for my-heart Sir Courtly; till Pve ſome aſſurance o? yours. Sir Co, What aſſurance wou'd your Ladyfhip have ? Leo. All manner—he that pretends to my heart---mulſt ſigh, and wait, and watch-—and pant—fight, and write——and kill himſelf.
Sir Co. All this I ha? done Madam,-and Ten thouſand * things more. Drove :
by your Windows, a thouſand times a day, ſonght you at the Parks and
the Plays. Was a conſtant faithful Attendant at all NIN". I preſum'd”
your Ladyitip nauſeates*Comedys.—— Leo. Oh ! Foh !-—
» / A . $-.- cog $4 = 284 a 4 : es - III 7. 4,
. guy $= 4 _
eee ct " —— <
-#$ir Co.” wi areſo Wl-rbred-- and wy toe Qty: and Nay * cram = Wl
44 Sir. Courtly Nice +
with our odious Sex—that have not always the moſt inviting ſmell-Madam, you'l Pardon me——Now at Tragedies, the Houſe is all lin'd with Beauty,and ' then a Gentleman may endure it. And Thave gone, found not your Ladyſhip there,. drove home, kill'd my ſelf with ſighing, and then writ a Song. Leo. Oh! Heavens Sir Courtly,. did you ever writea Song upon me ? Sir Co. Above a thouſand. Leo. Oh: there's nothing charms me like a Song——
For Heavens ſake——the Song '——the Song—— Sir Co. ve above forty here in a ſweet Bag, I'le ſhew you the _n TIER
upon your Ladyſhip,? Tis thougbr to be a pretty Fooliſh ſoft Song , Moſt Ladies. are very " It.
_
As I Or unaware, ' On a Face ſo fair 5---- Leo. Oh big Courtly=——
Sir Co,n—n———— Your cruel Eye,
Lay watching b
T _ my =
Which you did Ke ” ſuch art :
That away wj't you ran, Whilſt I look'd on. —
To my ruin and grief ;,
Stop. Thief—ſtop Thief.
Oh | fine {oh ! fine !
Hg Co. That ſtop Thief, Madam, is pretty Novel:
Leo. Oh t delicate ! I'm charm ! ! Pm loſt {——fye what have I aid——-
Sir Co. What makes ms the. happyeſt of Creatures,
Zeo. 'b only railly—I renounce all---
Sir Co. Not for the World—-»--
Lee. Away— the. Song again——the Song—Tle hear enking but the Song.
Is there no tune to it ? Sir Co. One of my-ownp compoſing. Leo. That accompliſhment to ? Heavens ! low fine a Gentleman 1s this 3 Po
Sir-Ce.. Oh ! Madam, how proud you make me ? Leo. Oh! dear, how I betray my ſelf? fooliſh Creature----n0 more----no-
more---the Tune, the tune. «i lalways humour my words with my Ayr. So] make the Voice ſhake . {t Eine, in imitation of. a No that. rups after a Thief: Sto—ho— # © * ho——hop—Thicf——- , ( ſings.) ; y Leo. Oh! delicate /. cannot.1 learn ir Rto——ho—ho-—h ha ! ha ?: O- = ( inutates his Fooliſh ſinging, and falls into a laugh, } Sir. Co. Dear Madam, what makes your Ladyſhip laugh ?- Teo. Ata Coxcomb,. that thought to win me with a- Fooliſh: Song, this puts
- ÞÞinto my head. - Sir: Co. Oh! Foollh.” there are abandence of. thoſe Fooliſh: Fellows, and
$% 2 "0 — -] MN jo = [ 4 Ma w—_— << W — 2. A. > © oY ow = jw) = = 28 = * as ' & Cd £] SD bo — = a 'Þp 7 Ee DE bg
4- o adn ——
my- heart: to an in <ne- ni or ' Sir Co- Oh! Ma vegetal rat ily,”
Zeo. I'm abugd—unfortunate— © 4 - Cpt to hike TJ Sir Co. Oh! Madam, you take it wrongg— bf Leo, Pm abus'd. —— | #4
Sir Co.- Oh! Heavens! _ |
Leo. But the Songs very. fine (tho hehe hat
Sir Co. Pleaſant Creature. | (ings anddaighs Ss
- Leo. Coxcomb. — { aſide. )
Sir Co.. We ſhall be infinitely Fond—a pretty Glas, this Madim..  _
( fooks in a Glap.Y) ||
Lea So, hes makirg an afſignation with his own fooliſh. Face, Ile leave him.  -|| to Court that and: ſteal away. ( Exit, ) |
. Sir Co, Sto—ho—ho —hop—
l Enter Aunt.
An. Singing, Sir Courtly?
Sir Co. at your Service, Madam. Well, Madam; you have ſaid ſo many fine things to me,. that I: aſſure my ſelf of your heart, and now I am eſolv'd to puſh this oppertunity,/ to an extremity 0? bappjneſs. :
(Sir Courtly looks in the Glaf while he ſpeaks ): |
An. Oh! fortunate! this to me ?1 did make him ſome advances to day I can- -- } feſs, and have they had this ſucceſs? my heart pants: I am ſurpriz'd with .in- finite joy, and'am notable to anſwer-— ( aſide.) |
Sir Co. Well, Madam, 1 mult be happy, and ſo upon my—the Lady gone—
( turns from the Glaſt. )
Au: Sir Courtly you put me in great confuſion——
Sir Co. The Ladys conſent is very conftderable——ſhe governs-her Neice, an under her condu& may make me happy, with a reſerve to; Modeſty. { aſide. ) Well, Madam, ſhall [have your conſent to my happyneſs, my glory ?.
Ar. Oh / dear Sir / is it poſſible to ani{wer you ſo ſoon'?-
Sir Co; So ſoon, Madam ?. you know my paſſion had been Jong:
As. 1s it, poſſible? I ſwear I never heard of it before. |
Sir Co. That's ſtrange; wou'd not my Lord, your Nephew acquaint. you?!
Az. He never ſaid one word of it to- me:. W
—_
Sir Co. That's amaizing. | Ar. 1 find my: Nephew has been falſe: to:me. It ſeems *tis me the A re I : |
loves, and my Nephew wou'd defraud me of him, for his Nar-— Hne- doings. —. (.afiae. ).
Sir Co. I ſwear I thought your Ladyſhip had known, ahd granted youp COn-- ſent—yon Taid ſo many fine things——
Az. 1 ſaid 'no more,-----Sir Courtly, then what were: the reſult. 0? "my thoughts, upon the: contemplation of. your great deſert-----
Sir Co, Your Ladyſhips moſt humble Servant—--then I hope, Madam, ſince my. paſſion has been long, though you knew. not of-it,- you will not defer my happy-- neſs——cis in your power I'm certain, no Perſon controuls you----.
4 Controuls me ? that's pleaſant-----no Sir. . x | ' Sir Cos.
-4*
26 _ © Sir Courtly Nice: ;
*. Sir Co. She ays true =w— ſhe can bring her Nelce—- (4%)
I beſeech you, Madam, take pity of a-ſuffering Lover. . Ps Aa. Oh ! Sir, ſhon'd I conſent ſo ſoon, "twou'd be againſt all Forms.
' Sir Co. I would not for the World offend againſt any Forms. No Man wo more ſtudyes, and adores all manner of Forms——but my paſſion has been Jong. | | . [ know not what to ſay, Sir, indeed ] muſt not, —
'Sir Co. Oh ! Pardon me! fr Sy |
Anu. Oh! Pardon me! | _
Sir Co. Oh! Madam!
Au. You canfonnd me, Sir. ..
Sir Co. You diſtra&t me, Madam. It muſt be.—
Au. Well, Sir I yield, but with an extremity o' bluſhing.
Sir Co. Yonr moſt obliged humble Servant. =
Ar. My ſevere temper wou'd never ha? been wrought on ſo ſoon, but by fo Fane a Gentleman.
Sir Co. Your moſt humble Servant. $f |
Au. And to Revenge my ſelf on my Nephew, for his falſe play. ,
Sir Co. Well, Madam, we'l in my Coach to the next Church preſently.
en a Diſguiſe ; for I defire it may be' manag'd with all ſecreſy, till the Cere- mony of Marriage be over. | | Sir Co. With all my Soul ; for 1 infinitely love a ſecret Intrigue, eſpecially | whenevery body knows of it. | Az. Leaſt my Nephew light on us, and preyent it. Sir Cs. He's for the Match. : Au. He's very falſe. Sir. Co. Is it poſlible ? | Az. Is it not apparent, when he conceal'd the whole matter from me, leaſt I ſhould promote it ? . | Sir Co. That's unanſwerable, I'm amaz'd at it. Well, - Madam, I ſhall not fail of being happy ? — | Ax. Immediately, Sir. Sir Co. And you think you have power ? Ax. Power ? that's pleafant. | Sir Co. So— ſo—— ſhe'l bring of ſend her— ( afide ) Well, Madam, Yourumoſt humble Servant. : Au. Your very bluſhing Servant—— ( Exit. ) Sir Co. Your humble—ſto—ho—ho—hop—Thief—— ( Exit. ) - Enter Crack aud Leonora langhing. .Cr. An humble Thief indeed, ſteal an old Woman ? — | Leo. This was a pleaſure I cou'd not ha? thought of. .Now to our Aﬀair. Cr. Come— on with your Vizard. - (Exemn,) Scene chanzes to the Hall. Emter at-one Door, Hothead ard Teſtimony, at another Crack. ©e. Barbzrity ! falſehood! treachery ! murder. Hot. What's the matter ?
LE
Ry 46742 > tat Þ Lay ” 1-4 of: P.
Aa. "Tis very hard to reſiſt you, Sir Courtly. If you pleaſe I will firſt put
= IS Vo
Or ” RE - OS. RES. Wa
Cr. Did. not 1 Aiulate upon the ey of my roſy to' this Houſe, to be
kept from Women? and T am devour'd withe?m ; here's come into my Cham-
ber, a hot burnt Whore, with a black cruft upon her face—here thei Is, Avant. (Ex. Crack pal”s in Leonors vizarded..-
«Hot, You damn'd Whore, how came you into this houſe ? and what are you £
Ile ſee, your face: lezſee your braines, 1 fivear by Gogmagog, and and all the ſeven
Teſt. Qb! fd !oh! ſad. |
Cr. Shew me the face of a Woman ? F had rather ſee forty full moons.
Hot. Stand off Impertinence ; I will ſee her face.
Cr. Murder ! murder! call my Lord—— Lord, Lord— tfurder—xur- der ! Lord-—Lord—Lord.
Hot, Hold your bauling, le let her go.— For now I think on't, Ifmy Lord: ſhou'd find this Whore here when he gave fuch ſtrickt orders, we ſhou'd let no body out, or in, he*l make more noiſe _"_ this mad aaa ſo (ct us kick her our o' Doors, and ſay nothing.
- Teſt. Hold, let us not uſt Lalence to her—— ſhe's. a rea temptation to-
me. (aſia. ) Ple reprove the idle Woman, it may be, I may gain upon, her.
Hot, Gain a Clap;Sirrah4 for this is ſome of the Footmens Whores, pick'd
up in the dark. Get youygout you W hore. Teſt. No violence pray. She's a great :ſnare to me. ( aſide.) womak get you out woman— and dee hear ? —— Þle follow you, and we'l drink; a bottle. Leo, Do old godly knave, and thou ſhalt be'welcome- Teſt. 1 come! I come? ( aſide ) gct you out woman. Hot. Get you out—— you Whore, ' SY they. my Leo. ont.) Cr. Good morrow—=— up ſo early ? E:ot, What's the whimſy now ? Cr. AmnotIi Bed? .- ay Hort. In Bed ? |
Teſt. Poor ſoul, poor ſoul—— Cr. Iam not? faith. Then I walk in my ſleep - I was faſt aſleep inſt now, ond h
dreamt I faw Women, and Vizards, and all that 'Traſh ; and the fright put
me in a Feayour. I burn ;prethee give me a mouth full of ſweet ayT. (Exit Cr.”
Hot. Prethee take a belly full and be damn'd.. A fine time on't I have; with Whores, and Fools, and mad Men, and. Fanatiques. s ( Exit.)
Teſt. So now Te ſteal after her, for I find in mea very great UProar. CEx..
Scene changes to Violante's houſe, Enter Farewel— Leonora vizarded, Teſtimony.
Fa, Come i in, come in honeſt old Fornicator, though the girle be mine, when: -
&- have had my collation, if ſhe*l-conſent, faith, thou ſhalt have a bit; ; [love T:
Wenching Rogue i”'my heart.
Teſt. Oh! dear Sir, your very humble Servant, and truly I- am-a kind of a
wag. I love a pretty. bit ſometimes.
Fa. And Ilove thee the hetter for it, and. this isa pretty bit, thou halt 4 her. ( Leo. pul's o her vizard. )
Teſt, Oh !'dear ! undone !_ undone !:
_
wa 5,
- ® 2 - Ss: » > BY" Lat LR FLY
"Le. Kay, nay nes et " ” is your''s : Sons oor, EET Fo Y. #5304 | F Re; Oh ! Madam, Ant t Viſcover me -th my Lentils 700 ; halt fiox ofily Bate” L "i my. prayers, but the. prayers of all the ſober} -party for. 00 al dkber, oy lite. he Leo. So, ke rars fre o'-Whoring to Praying. _ , © "IILOIGE + 4 Fe, Are not you 0? Rogue Sirrah ? SHINES: EY " 7G K; Teſt. I know I ſhall be call*d Rogue by the Popiſh Arya then Ridycs at 4
my. fall, bat I hope my fall will be ſanctified unto me ſanding. — o Fa, Among the: Wenches—-Sirrah-—* --co me Sirrah th, you Thall, thay
Fmy 7 berter Up- | | Lord comes, for his mortificatior, as well as yours. * x!
| "Ws Oh! 'my fleſh, ithas undoneme. |
Enter Violante, and Crack. ' YN 7 I | Fin. My dear. _ LE Eetgs yds OD p +. : wy | fi Leo, My dear.----- © x - Vw. Excellent Crack; for this great peice 0? fervice, Dle ha® theg knighted |
"under a petticote. Well we .muſl ſend for fiy Lord, to lavgh at him." --
Teft. Oh!'dear! 1 tremble! as | Yio, Who's there ? tell my Lord, I deſire to ſpeak with him.
Leo. Pray let him bring Sir Courtly Nice, and his Brid&'with him ; "be fite - $ you ſay nothing 0* me.----- ob _ LE footm. ) -."
Pio. Are you a Bride yet P. |
Leo. Not yet.
Vio. Get in, and let my Chaplain make you one.
Leo. Come” Mr. Teſtimony. Mr. . Crack, bring him. *
Cr. How now you Rogue ? what's your buli neſs ?
Teſt. Oh! my reproach will be great. ( Ex, Fa..Leo. Cr. Teſt.)
Fio. Mr, Surly. | Enter Surly#® © | * |
Sar, Well, what now ? . | 4 Yio, Now, you ſhall be my Husband, | | Sur. Your "Jack, to turn and roaſt you for another, whillt I ha? no olhares in you. Ve. According to the ſhare I have in you : You men wou *d feign engroſs all manner ©o' Sins, by the pretended Prerogative o? your Sex; -well if iniqui- ] ty be your Eſtate, when you ha' married me, Ple put in for my thirds. 4, [1 Sur. I doubt'it not ; within this week, I ſhall ſee ina Fops hand, a Billet doux, that is 4 Ticket to let him into your Play houſe. « Vio. Prethee leave of this doged humour. ;
_ Sur, 1 ha' none; fawning is a Dogs humour. Vio. Nay but Sullenneſs ; it taxes thy Eſtate, that thou art Never the better | for it ; *tis a french Eſtate. £4 |
Sur. Ay,. but to lick a fool's ſhoe, is a Spaniels Eſtate.
Vie. Prethee dreſs like a Gentleman. 2
Sur. $91 do; but I won'd not dreſs like a Gentleboy, lag at my yea $'a- | monglt thoſe Children, to play with their Toys be always folded up my ? love letter, with a ſuperſcription, theſe to the next/pretty BArke. * |
.. F70. There's 3 00 altering thee-----go 1 ina Wille. - bon ng Ts ZI | 22. £2 : E.. 4 N iT £
5 TILES) a4.” > Sar os Ko PS a CRIES,”
# »% & * 8 Þ. > on Ro we IJ VF A , 4 "Y v FF 64 Fg oF i wh d Yes v.
4 ST b — EE —
Or, it cannot Be, © 49
Ex. Surly. Enter Lord Belguard, Sir Courtly, Aunt vizarded.
Vio. My Lord, your humble ſervant. I invited you hither, to reconcile you to your Siſter, ſhe's weary of your Government ; and has diſpos'd of her ſelf.
Bell. Ay, Madam, but according to my dwn deſires, that now I ſuppoſe you will acknowledge the good effects of my Government ;—Siſter ſalute your friend.
Vio. Do you take that for your Siſter ? then Ile ſhew you the good effeas of your Government, Open the Door.
The Scene is drawn, and Farewel, Leonora, 4 Parſon, Crack, Teſtimony, -ppear-. Bell. My Siſter there ? call my ſervants. Cr. Nay then call mine, the great Afogul, and the King o' Bantam, Ple pep- er you.
: Bet, Then you were the Pimp were you—Sirrah-—I may chance begin with you. |
Vio. How? P my houſe and preſence ? touch him if you dare.
Bell. Pm made an Aſs on.
Cr. Not far from that Circumſtance.
Bell. You Raical ——
Vio. Again ?
Sr. Co. But what the Devil am I made? what have I got ?
Leo. Even my ſtale Aunt.
An, Sawcy huzzy. Sir Co The Azunt ? what have you put upon me, Madam ?
Au. What have I put upon you, Sir, more than your ſelf deſir'd ? Did not you declare you have long lid a paſſion for me ?
Sir Co. A Paſlion for you ? Comical ! that's probable ! Rot me if ever I had a Paſſion for you in my Life. I meant all to your Neice; a Paſſion for an old Woman ?
Ay, 11|-bred Fop.
Sir Co. Very hine— |
Fio. Now, my Lord, what ſay you of your fine Cotqueen art of Conſzrving Woman ? will ſhe keep if not candied with Virtue? here is a piece o? dryed Sweet-meat, you ſee cou*d not keep z and proves by her example, that the Huffs of either Sex, when they are boldly attaqued in private, ſooneſt deliver their Weapons. |
Au. This 1s all ill manners,
Vio. Ay, but here's a+ old Cat will ſuffer no Vermin to come into the Houſe; but then he has a Liquoriſh tooth, and loves to have a ſweet bit for bimſelf; he wou'd fain ha" pick'd up your Siſter for a Wench.
Bell, How ?
Teſt. *Tis true indeed my Lord ; 1 will not tell a lye for the whole World.
Bell. Oh! Villain——well Sirrah—1'le leave you te my Couſin Hor-heads correction.
Vio. But your faults my Lord Ple take into my corre&ion, and give my ſelf to Mr. Surly, — Mr. Szrly. ;
Enter Surly, Sur, Well. — R
H. Bet.
Bell. To Surly? Sur. Ay, now Nice thy quarrel and mine isat an end, I'le let thee bean Af
forty years longer.
Sir Co.- You are arude fellow, and you are ill-bred— and Ple revenge my ſelfon you all, as far as my Sword and my Wit can g0—- .
Leo, Wit —ha!ha— ( all laugh )
Sir Co. Very fine manners this — —my Coach ——Madam, you may follow your own occaſions —1I have none wit an Old Woman. ( ro the Aunt. )
At. You are a Coxcomb.
Sir Co. Your Servant— my Coach-—
Leo. Muſt I loſe you Sir Courtly —ſtop Theif—ſtop Theif—
Sir Co. Oh! your Servant—my Coach you Dogs — ( Exit.) Viv. Come my Lord, I fee Patience in your Face, all may be well yer. |
Sur, How ! Jilting already ?
io. Promiſe | ſhall enjoy all and fingular the Priviledges, Liberties, and immunitics of an Engliſh Wife.
Bell. All. _
Vio. That is to ſay, Ramble, Rant, Gam?, Dreſs, Viſit, Prate, Ogle,
_Kifs——and— - . Bell. Hold—hold— whether the Devil is ſhe running: Kiſs, kiſs—and
—ſtop for Heavens ſake. Yio. Kiſs, and before your Face is it not the prerogative ofan Engliſh Wife ? Surly, -1 owe thee a reward for Service, Kiſs me. : Bell. That's not to be borne.
Vio. Surly, | am thy Wife. Bell. Hold -—hold-—for Heavens ſfake— do not uſe me thus ?
 Vio. Then do not Rebel, but practiſe obedicntly, the poſtures of an Engliſh Husband, before you are Liſted; Poiſe your Hat,craw your left Leg backward,bow with your Body, and look like an Afs, whileſt I Kiſs Jike a Wife— Szrly kiſs me.
Bell. If he does—— " ( lays his Hand on his Sword. )
Sur, With all my Heart. If I kiſs thee, let the Devil Marry thee.
(ke offers to kiſs ber, and ſhe gives him a box o'th* Ear.)
Vio. And the Devil kiſs thee, cou'd!t thou think any Woman wou'd ſuffer thy face to come near her, but ſome Dairy Maid, to curdle her Milk ?
All. Ha! he! ha! ( all laugh. )
Sxr. Hoh! hoh ! What a ſociety o? Gotam's are here, to laugh at a Man for mifling a woman ? had1 married her, as my Lord Wiſc-acre intends to do, I had de-  fery'd to ha? been laught at, for a Coxcomb,and a Cuckold,as he will be in few days. Vis. How ?
Sur. Ay, you are all Whores, Pox on you, all Whores, (Ex,) Enter Hothead and all the Servants,
Hot. Did you ſend for us?
Bell. Yes, do you ſez where my Siſter is ?
Hot. By what witchcraft was this ?
Fio. Do not. you remember a Vizard you turn'd out o? Doors ?
Ht. Was it you ? |
Zeo, Even the fame: _ "ff 3! 8 Het.
p) To Sir Courtly Nice :
I— III OT IT ons o—_— -
Or, it cannot Be.
I———_ m——_ ———_—— —__—
mY ICP 5 ERS , 8.5 a
©_ Ss. 2 "51 +4 4 #4. L.. * +4 1 ts --Þ>= ES *$"*
%
Hot. Then you deſerve to be turn*d out o' Doors again: >$ | Bell. But what do you deſerve Sir ? that not only turn'd my Siſter out 0? L Doors—- but let Mr. Teftimony— pick her up for a Wench.
Hot. Oh ! Dog ——-— oh ! Rogue — Teſ. Iam no Rogue— a Man may fall, and be Godly in the main— I am ſatisfied-in my Spirit, I am a Godly Man-— - Het, Here's a Rogue—Sirrah— Sirrah — » ( beats and kicks Tefſ. ) Teſ. Perſecution—Perlſecution——Papiſt——do——kick the Godly, kick the Pro- teſtants out o' th* Kingdom——do Papiſt—I ſee what you wou*d be at= (Ex.) Bell. So Couſin now I have done with ſpyes——you may follow your own bu- ſineſs, if yon have any—— Hot. Buſineſs ? yes I have buſineſs, and will have buſineſs as long as there is a Fasatick in the Kingdom, and ſo farewell—— ( Ex.) Bell. I am now convinced, Virtue is a Womans only guard. If ſhe be baſe Metal, to think by Chimiſtry, to turn her into Gold, | Is a vain dream of what we never ſee, | And Ple proclaim to all=—It cannot be, ( Exeunt Omnes, } . FINIFS:
——
—— ow
mmmurnmmmm—_—_—_ = O——S:—— - ———— mncana—m—ed ———_—_— y
” _o_m_—_RSAD
ASONG to be Sung in Dialogue between a Man and a Woman in the Third Aft, to Sir Courtly Nice, at his firſt appearance. Man. H ! be kind, my Dear, be kind, ' | Whilſt our Loves and we are Young. We ſhall find, we ſhall find Time will change the Face or Mind; Both will not continue long.
Oh ! be kind, my Dear, be kind.
Woman. No, 1 Love, and fear to tooſe you, Therefore "ts I muſt refuſe you, When 1've yielded you my Crown Youl no more Obedience own. No, I Love, and fear to looſe you Therefore *tis I muſt refuſe you. Man. The Fair by kindnefs Reign, By cruelty Deſtroy. If you can Charme with the Pain BB Of Love, then what can you do with the Foy ? The Fair by kindnef Reign, | By cruelty Deſtroy. Woman. I fear to yield but cannot deny.
Man. If you do not IT ſhall die. Woman. So ſhall 7. Both. So ſhall T.
Chorus j Tien come to Foy —come to Foy, together. S$ Better Love than we fhou'd die.
Come to foy, come to Joy.
A Dialogue Sung between an Tudian Man and Woman, in the Fourth AQ, to Farewel, Violante, Crack, Being an imatation of a Song, Sung by ſome
Natives of 1ndia, before the late King.
Man,
___ Woman,
Man:
Woman.
Both
/ | an lovely Indian Sea of Charms, I'd envy ng Jaw-waw ali:e Might I be ſo, bleſt to dive In thy ſoft yielding Arms | With Jimminy, Gomminy, whee-whee, whee. With a Gomminy, Jimminy-whee.
1 wowd if youwld be true,
| But when you *ve done Tou'l be gone,
And threw me of with a Shoo-ſhooh, ſhooh. And a huſh pooh, | And &# fuſh whooh, |
And a migotty, magotty, migotty, magotty, Migotty, magotty, ſhooh.
No, no, my other Females all Yellow, Fair or Black, To thy Charms ſhall proſtrate fall, As every kind of Elephant does To the White Elephant Buitenacke: And thou alone ſhall have from me Jimminy, Gomminy, whee, whee, whee, The Gomminy Jimminy, whee.
The great Jaw-waw that Rules our Land, And pearly Indian Sea
- #Jas not fo abſolute Command,
. As thou haſt over me. : With a Jimminy Gomminy, Gomminy Jimminy, Jimminy. Gomminy, whee.
Thou alone ſhalt have from me
Jimminy Gomminy, Gomminy, Jimminy, Jimminy Gomminy,
Whee, whee, whee, whee, whee, whee.
_ 1, TB — eat AABRA o-
