Requested Title: T AMERLANE THE G REA T
Authors: Charles Saunders
Matched Anchor: Tamerlane the Great
TCP: A62223
EEBO: 13036125
Source Title: Tamerlane the Great a tragedy : as it is acted by Their Majesties servants at the Theatre Royal / by C. Saunders, Gent.
Source Author: Saunders, C. (Charles), fl. 1681.; Dryden, John, 1631-1700.; Banks, John, d. 1706.
Source Date: 1681
Source URL: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/A62223/master/A62223.xml
Metadata Score: 0.516
Unit Score: 0.909

---

TAMERLANE THE GREAT. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted by their Maiesties Servants AT THE Theatre Royal
By C. SAUNDERS, Gent
—Neque adhuc virtus in floribus ulla est,
Transit in AEstatem post Ver robustior annus,
Fitque Valens Juvenis—
LONDON. Printed for Richard Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel Street near Covent-Garden, 1681
THE PREFACE
THIS Play, as it was Writ only for my divertisement at Vacant Hours, or Recreation after severer Studies, was never design'd to see the light, at least not betray the weak ness of its Author so publickly on the Stage, or more uni versally in Print, had not the Communication of it to one or two Friends spread the rumour of it so far about the Town and Vniversity, that running like Wild-Fire through every place, it kindled a general ex pectation in all that either knew me in my self, or by my Friends to see it in Publick
Nevertheless, their perswasions and inducements cou'd not make me Presume, to trust so far to my own small abilities, or to rely so much on my own weak Iudgment, as to send it forth into the World, un til it had past the Censures of some (I may say) the greatest part of the Witty and Iudicious Men of the Town; untill it had receiv'd some Rules for Correction from Mr. Dryden himself, who also was pleas'd to Grace it with an Epilogue, to which it ows no small part of its success
After this, I thought I might safely enough commit it to its For tune, and having had the Approbation of the Greater, I presume it was Protected from falling under the Censure of the Lesser, and half Witted Iudges
But no sooner can a young Writer appear in the World, but he is look'd upon by those squint-ey'd Pretenders, to wit, no less than some Notorious Malefactor, or Branded Outlaw, whom all may Prosecute, Attaint, Iudge, Condemn, or what they please, cum Privilegio
For passing by some, whose more nice Iudgment, or rather prying appetite, can find faults where few others wou'd suspect them, some whose sharper Wit is Satyrically employ'd in turning the best thoughts into Ridicule, to Ruine a Writer, as it were betwixt Iest and Ear nest; There are others who wanting the sense to discern, what is, and where a true Fault lies, nay, sometimes to distinguish it from a Beau ty, will yet in spight of Stupidity have their share too in Damning the Reputation of an Author; and the means they took, was to give out, that this was only an Old-Play Transcrib'd
But I hope I may easily unload my self of that Calumny, when I shall testifie that I never heard of any Play on the same Subject, untill my own was Acted, neither have I since seen it, though it hath been to • d me, there is a Cock-Pit Play, going under the name of the Scy thian Shepherd, or Tamberlain the Great, which how good it is, a ny one may Iudge by its obscurity, being a thing, not a Bookseller in London, or scarce the Players themselves, who Acted it formerly, cou'd call to Remembrance, so far, that I believe that whoever was the Author, he might e'en keep it to himself secure from invasion, or Plagiary; But let these who have Read it Convince themselves of their Errors, that this is no second Edition, but an entirely new Play
Moreover, utterly to overthrow this Objection, I must acquaint you that I drew the design of this Play, from a late Novell, call'd Tamer lane and Asteria, which I'm sure bears not half the Age of the Tra gedy before mention'd, and I am confident the Characters are quite dif ferent
The last and worst aspertion is cast upon me, is, that I was help'd by others in the performance. But if I have not Friends that can clear me of this also, I hope the Congruity of the Style throughout the whole Play will testifie the simplicity of the Author
This I think may satisfie my more equal Iudges, that this Trifle is mine own, or if you will, honestly begotten between me, and my Muse, which I hope is yet so Chast, and her Reputation so sound, as not to have her Issue Branded with Plurality of Fathers
Thus we see what kind of Criticks we have now-a-dayes, that can lye by the whole sale, and Damn a Play in a Breath, that we may the more easily bear with them who pique at word by word, and thought by thought, in a more modest retail manner
I shall not now strive to defend this Trifle in any particular Circum stances, but leave it to those of a more impartial Iudgment; hoping first they may not find as many faults, as they expect, next that they wou'd be so kind as to wink at those which do occur, attributing them to the Youth of the Author, and consequently his want of experience, and Iudgment
To my ingenious Friend Mr. Charles Saunders, on his Play of Tamerlane
WHen Night has thrown her sable Vest away,
And the Sun's mounted on the Wings of day,
Bright as Parnassus all around he Guilds,
First the young Trees, and then the Mother Fields,
To Youth, and Morn such Glories offers he,
Which Age can only wonder at and see,
But when the God has reacht the middle way,
He the World visits with a courser Ray,
Whips his dull Steeds, and hastens to the Sea,
Cooling his Tresses on the Amber Shore,
Then hates what he so well did love before
Or as an Infant spring, that from the side
Of some lone Hill does through the Meadows glide,
Whose Chrystal Waters as they silent pass,
Aford the Nymphs both Dress, and Looking Glass,
Who take the yellow Sands that lye below,
And on their Heads the Golden Powder throw,
Whilst the Rich Flood most prodigally decks
With Rings their fingers, and with Pearls their necks
In whose clear Stream the Heav'ns delight to play
Phoebus to wast the tedious Summers Day,
The Moon and Stars, the live-long Night away,
Beneath 'tis Spring, above, Eternal Ray,
It's Winter Bloom, and ev'ry Season May
But track these Beauties, and before they've run
More Miles than Youth has years, they all are gone,
Strong Tydes molest its' wanton Course and o're
It's hoary swelling Head huge Tempests roare,
And all it's Glebes are Sandy like it's Shore
Till sick with Storms and every surly Blast,
'Tis forc'd to make the Sea its Grave at last
On then brave Youth with Harp Divinely strung,
And sing more sweet than ever Antients sung,
Than Orpheus, Homer, or than Cowley Young;
E're Age shall come and thou shalt live to see
That Fumbling time of Love and Poetry
Now of the Young, you all the vigor shew,
And of the Old the solid Iudgment too
To you the Merits of e'm both belong,
Not Alexander fought so very Young,
Nor Conquer'd he the mighty World so soon
As you have charm'd, and all the Muses won;
And wise Minerva, like a Mother fond,
With her own Wreaths thy darling Temples Crown'd,
Has thee o're all thy Elder Brothers plac'd,
And with a Benjamins large Portion grac'd
But let me not in wondring at your Youth,
Forget what's due to Friendship and to Truth
Know Wit, like Beauty, pleases where it harms;
A Checquer'd Serpent 'tis with Sting and Charms
And happy's he that never thinks at all,
And far more happy is that lavish Fool,
That dully wasts his Fortunes on a Whore,
Than he that splits upon this dangerous Shore
Not Spencer dead, nor Spencer now alive
Cou'd ever find a way by Wit to thrive
It is a Dream of Wealth, a Fairy Land,
A fickle Treasure grasp'd like Golden Sand,
Which, as 'tis held, does vanish through the Hand
The Lethargy of the best natur'd Mind,
A Foe to Business, and to all unkind;
Like that too kills insensible and sure
For he with Verse diseas'd, does still the more
Court his lov'd Plague, and itches to be poor;
A Mark where vile Pretenders lose their aim,
And ev'n the best get but an empty Name
Launch out young Merchant new set up of Wit,
The World's before thee, and thy Stock is great,
Sail by thy Muse, but never let her guide,
Then without danger you may safely glide
By happyer Studies steer'd, and quickly gain
The promis'd Indies of a hopeful Brain,
Bring home a Man betimes that may Create
His Country's Glory in the Church, or State
J. Bankes
J. Bankes
Drammatis Personae
Tamerlane Emperor of the Tartars
Bajaset Emperor of the Turks
Sons to Tamerlane. Arsanes Mandricard
Arsanes
Mandricard
Counsellors. Odmar Abdalla
Odmar
Abdalla
Friends to Arsanes. Axalla Zanches
Axalla
Zanches
Women
Asteria Daughter to Bajaset
Ispatia Wife to Mandricard
Zayda Confident of Asteria
Priests, Guards, Attendants, and c
Scene Samarcanda
PROLOGUE
HOw modern Prologues differ from the Old!
Those su'd and pray'd, but these huff, rail, and scold
Now sure the Poets of our age presume
They have out-done the wits of Greece and Rome;
Who by ill-natur'd Satyr strive t'obtain
What they by low submission sought to Gain
What bold Offendor ever yet found Grace
By spitting vilely in his Iudges Face?
Yet they so fondly do themselves esteem,
They hiss at you, yet think you shou'd Clap them
Nay Branding you for Fools in open Pit,
Hold it your Duty to cry up their Wit
Vollies of Curses on your heads they send,
Damn one of them, They injur'd right pretend;
And with unreasonable Confidence
Excuse their Failings by your want of Sense
Some things you may not understand, 'tis true;
'Tis more then Oedipus himself can doe
None of your Actions can their Censure pass
Your Cravat, Wig, French-dress, or Pocket-glass,
No not so much as Whore—
Do you dress well? then rudely they Suppose
Your Taylor made your Wit, as well as Cloths
Have you a well-becoming Wig, They'l Swear
You Bought Your falser Senses in false Hair
Thus turn your Wit to Scorn, yet think it much
If you their husky Farce, or puffy Bombast touch
Thus Malecontents wou'd Laws to Rulers give,
But think it Tyranny if they receive
Let not their railings Loyal Poets blind
That you'r no Fools we by your Patience find
Fools will be Angry, but you still are Kind
Then in that Old, not this New-fangled way
To you our Author do's his Thanks repay
For your kind meeting on this happy Day
If he Offend he do's your Grace Implore,
And Swears to mend, or Trouble you no more
Theives for one Crime have often Scap'd the Rope,
Nay Priests, and Plotters are not out of Hope
Then Spare our Author for a Nobler Fate
He yet deserves your Pity, not your Hate
〈...〉 Magnes, in Russel-Street, near Covent-Garden
ALL the Tragedies and Co medies of Francis Beu mont and Iohn Flesher, in one Volume, containing fifty one Plays
Tartuff, or the French Puri tan
Forc'd Marriage, or the Jealous Bride
English Monsieur
All Mistaken, or the mad Cou ple
Generous Enemies
Andromacha; A Tragedy
Calisto: or the Masque at Court
Country-Wit. A Comedie
Destruction of Ierusalem, 2 parts
Miseries of Civil War
Henry 6. with the Murder of the Duke of Glocester
Nero, a Tragedie
Gloriana, a Tragedie
Sophonisba, or Hanibals over throw
Alexander the Great, or the Ri val Queens
Mithridates King of Pontus
Caesar Borgia, Son of Pope A lexander 6
Oedipus, King of Thebes
Theodosius, or the Force of Love
The Plain Dealer
The Town-Fop, or Sir Timothy Taudry
Abdullazar, or the Moors Re venge
Madam Fickle: or the Witty False one
The Fond Husband, or the Plot ting Sisters
The Vertuous Wife, or good luck at last
The Fool turn'd Critick, a Co medie
Squire Oldsap, or the Night Ad venturers
The Mistaken Husband, a Co medie
Mr. Limberham, or the Kind Keeper
Notes and Observations on the Empress of Morocco
The Orphan, or unhappy Mar riage
The Souldiers Fortune
Sertorius. A Tragedie
Tamberlane the Great
King Lear
Novels Printed this Year, 1680
The Amours of the King of Ta maran
The Amours of the French King and Madam Laniler
The Amours of Madam and the Count de-Guich
The Pilgrim: A Satyrical No vel on the horrible Villanies of those Persons
The Secret History of the Earl of Essex and Queen Eliza beth
The Policy of the Clergie of France, to suppress the Pro testants of that Kingdom
Tamerlane the Great
ACT I. Scene I
The Curtain being drawn up discovers the Temple of Maho met, in it Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Abdal la, and Priests who sing the following Hymn
Pr
SIng we, Alha, Lord of Fate,
Father, Ruler of this State,
In whose hand are War and Peace,
Overthrows and Victories
Sing we to thy Pow'r Divine
At whose Nod the Heavens Bow,
To whom Gods Allegiance owe,
Whose just Favour Kings doth Crown,
Monarchs perish at whose Frown,
Sing we at thy Holy Shrine
Ch
Accept our Thanks, accept our Praise
Our solemn Vows, our Eulogies,
The Altars which our Hearts do raise
Accept the humble Sacrifice
Pr
To thee, Alha, Virgins Sing
To thee Tune each Tender String,
Carry'd by an Holy Zeal
Of the Pious Matrons tell
To thy Grace Triumphant Youth
To thee glad Old Age doth Kneel,
Nor do Kings, thy Power Conceal
But all admire, all Confess
iTs thou Cursest, thou dost Bless
To thee owe their Rise, and Growth
Ch
Accept our Thanks, and c
Pr
See the Trophies see the Spoils
The glad Harvest of our Toils
See the Scythian Majesty
Crown'd with Peace and Victory
To his Scepter Turk giv'n;
To him Conquer'd Asi • bows
To him th' Earth her Freedom owes
Fear we now no blow of Fate,
'Tis Iust Alha rules our State,
And our King's the Care of Heav'n
Ch
Accepted are our thanks our Praise
Our Solemn Vows our Eulogies
'The Altars which our Hearts do raise
Accepted is the Sacrifice
After the Hymn Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Ab dalla, with Guards, come forward on the Stage, and the Scene changes to the Pallace
Tam
After our Sacred Rites to Alha paid
'Tis fit we show our second Thanks in Joy
And Triumphs which to Victory are due
Let Scythia now Arrai'd in all the Pride
Of Conquer'd Asia dart her Glory to
The utmost Gades, and to the utmost Ind
Let all her sleeping Monarchs rise and see,
How far her new-got Liberties Extend
And as of Old her Vertue has alone
Assyrian and Pellaean Arms withstood,
Nor dar'd the flying Parthian to look back
Upon his Enemy, but by retreat
Sought Life, not Conquest. Our Faim'd Ancestors
Then boasted how they could a Foe repel,
Far greater's our Renown in Glorious Arms,
Who know to Conquer too, enlarge our sway,
And Teach the Haughty Ottoman to bow
Man
Needless, Great Sir, was that far Boasted Gift
That Law which to your Tartary entail'd
The Turkish Empire, when their Kingly Line
For want of Heirs should cease, you scorn'd to wait
The slow Event; (or shou'd it be) to take
Ev'n Empire at a Gift; but Gazing on
The Golden Prey, you thought it lookt too great
To be so cheaply Bought, then Seizing it
With Danger, and the famous Lot of War
Made it your Merits due, and Valours right
Abd
That Man who threatn'd all the World with ruin
That fierce, that yet unconquer'd Bajaset,
Whose dreadful Name so oft shook Greece with Terror
And struck her Princes Dumb with fear, That Man
To whom all Asia Bow'd, has Learnt to Kneel,
To Tamerlanes more Mighty Pow'r; Avert
Ye Gods, all Nations Cry, from us the Hand
Of the all-Conquering God-like Tamerlane
Odm
Abdalla, no; the World is pleas'd and silent,
Amaz'd, and wondring at the sudden Change,
The happy change of Monarchs, Bless their Stars
By whose kind influence doubtful Victory
Flew where Desert, and working Virtue call'd
While to your Arms all Nations wisht Success,
To you who shou'd Revenge the Injur'd Earth
And for a Tyrant give the World a King
Tam
Stain not with flatteries the famous Day
But rather let our Victory appear,
By her own Trophies absolute, and sure
Let Blaze through all our Streets the Captive Moon
That Superstitious Idol of the Field
In Solemn Process March our Slaves of War
Each Tartar to his Turkish Prey a Guard,
Your Heads with Lawrel Crown'd, your Hands with Spoils,
Filling with wel-come Joy the shouting Crowd
For a Just Trophie to our own Ambition
Call here the Captive Monarch to our sight
I wou'd Survey each Limb of that Great Man,
Try his fierce Temper, see what awful Pride
Held in such fear the Subject Nations
Bajaset and Asteria are brought in Bound
Baj
Death,
I've view'd thee in a Thousand, Thousand Shapes,
When not the fear of all thy Murdring Engines,
E're shook my Soul so much, as now the thought
Of this Tongue-Combat—give me Patience, Alha!
Tam
What Mutters he?
Baj
Infectious be my Breath,
And Blast thee ere thy Taunts can vex my Soul,
For I conceive I shall be talk'd to Death
Tam
Think not, O King, we come in Proud Disdain
To thy fal'n State, or scorn thy Ebbing Fortunes,
Or with Vain Glory to Commend our Deeds
Which of themselves do loudly Praise the Doer
But as thy Conqueror and Prince to claim
A just Submission to our Power; Live,
But to our Mercy owe the Life we Give
Baj
And dost thou think the Glorious Bajaset
Can stoop so low? speak, Alha, say, my Stars
Is't just that I who held the fate of Kings
In this Right Hand, and scatter'd Death's among
The Tyrants of the World, as fast as words
Cou'd mingle them; at last shou'd hold my Life
On any upstart Power? First shall th' Enfeebled Sun
Stoop down, and Borrow from the Earth his Heat,
The Stars from Northern Fires take their Light,
And Gods of Kings shall Mortal Blessings ask
E're I to thy scorn'd favour own a Debt
Tam
Talk on, fond Slave, and Glut thy self with thinking,
For words and thoughts are all thy Weapons now,
Which yet thy Abject State shall prove but Vain
And make thee a much greater—
Baj
Emperor!
The Brave are alwayes so; nor can the Fates
Debase an inborn Virtue, Oh that Frown
That Frown suits wondrous well the baleful Brow
Of an Exalted, Stern, fate-looking Tyrant!
So stretch thy self Ambitious Arrogance,
Stretch on the Wheel of Pride thy streightned Nerves
Till thy Cramp'd Limbs yield Musick to my Ears,
Proud, Vain Usurper—
Tam
Such was Ottoman
He Built his Throne by Virtue, and I mine
Speak, if thy Pride can give a Vent to Truth
Which is the Nobler Title, fairer Name,
A Crown'd Usurper, or a Captive King?
Baj
Gods! that I live to hear that vile Reproach ▪
By Alla 'tis too much—Now cou'd I fly
Like some Fierce Lyon scap'd the Hunters Hand
(His Strength by Rage Improv'd, Rage by Despair)
Against my Victor—ha, Inform me Slaves
Who, or from whence was that bold Son of War
Who durst with me in dreadful Combat Joyn?
That Chief in sable Arms! for yet I see not
His Face in all this Crowd
Tam
Behold thy Greatest
Most Dreadful Foe, see me Heav'ns fatal Scourge
Sent from above to Purge the sickly Earth
By Blood from Bloody Tyrants
Baj
No, fond Man,
Mistake me not; that Conquerour was one
One Nobler far, and fairer to behold
Then any thy throng'd Court do's to my Eyes display
Tam
Spightful and false thy base Reproaches are,
Say Odmar, speak the Valiant Mandricard,
The Mighty nothing of that Strangers Acts
Man
Not Sir, to Lessen or Eclipse your Fame
Do I to that brave Strangers high Desert
Due Honours pay, not that the Fierce Abdalla,
Wise Odmar, or the Valiant Aldegar
Did less then God-like acts; yet Sir, to speak
His Worth I Envy, not those Numerous Bands
To Conquest by your Royal ▪ Conduct led
Equal'd that Heroes Fame, who follow'd by
A Guard of Horse in Mournful Black Arra'id
O're ran our fainting Enemies; none durst
Withstand him but their War-like Emperor,
Whose rashness caus'd his Fate, the brave unknown
With force Superior drew him to our Camp,
Threw him into my wide-spread Arms, and Cry'd
Take here a Present from the Man you hate;
Then adds, I ask but this for my Reward
He was a King, be sure you use him so
Tam
Gods! I shall jealous of my Conquest grow!
Odm
Nor he, nor Heav'n your Glory cou'd obscure!
Since Mandricard was sharer in the War
For by him fell the great Ortobulus
The Hopes of Turky, and the Prop of Battel!
Him did he Disinherit with his Sword,
And snatch'd his Birth-right World as his Reward
Man
Curse on thy Tongue! what Frenzy broke thy silence?
[Aside to Od
Thy Breath has Blasted me, and for a flash
Of Honour, Damn'd me to Eternal Flames
Tam
My Noble Son—
Baj
'Tis false, ye spightful Powrs,
Ortobulus (I'le ne're believe it) slain
By that weak Arm, what Millions back'd the Coward?
Tam
Fair Virtue was his Guard, approach me nigh,
Embrace me round; now claim thy just Reward
Ask freely; for the Glory of the Act deserves
What ere thy Swoln Ambition can Demand
What Will not Conquerors on the Brave bestow?
What sad Disorder moves my Mandricard?
What foolish Passion dares disturb my Son?
Man
Who can withstand the vastness of such Hopes?
Tam
Have we not giv'n our Word, and can we Lye?
Man
Far-bee't from me such Blasphemy to think
Tam
Odmar, Abdalla, witness to my Vow,
If ought I can deny to him! I Love
Above the World, which he can ask with Honour,
Sudden Destruction seize my Perjur'd Soul
Faith is the brightest Jewel of a Crown
Man
Speak my Souls great Ambassador, my Tongue,
Pronounce thy Message loud; a King Commands
O speak what thou desirest most to speak,
Pard'n Sir, my too rude Carriage,
Tam
Say Noble Youth
Man
Low as the Earth two Monarchs I Implore,
Rather two Gods in saving pity great,
As Heav'n may bless your Throne with Victory,
[ To Tam
As Heav'n may raise you higher by your Fall,
[ To Baj
I beg this Princess from your Royal hands
Ast
With all the force a Virgins Tears can press
On any Soul, I here implore my Death
Ten thousand Deaths e're yield my Innocence
To be polluted by his loath'd Embraces
Baj
Curse him, Asteria, curse the fatal Source
Of thine, of mine, of the Worlds wretched State,
Upon a Fathers blessing curse the Race
Of Perjur'd Tamerlane, there's poyson in it
And rank Infection, and consuming Plagues
Man
Is she not Fair, my Lord!
Is she not Innocent as Babes new Born?
Tam
Mean Soul, degenerate Boy, I charge thee cease,
Canst thou behold this haughty slave in Chains
Outdare our Pow'r, and scorn our offer'd favours,
Nay Curse thee to thy Face, and hold thee worthless
The gift thou ask'st? deny thee with Contempt?
And thou yet stoop to him, kneel, pray to him?
Wipe off, rash boy, thy growing Glories stain
Or quit the Name of Son—
Man
How all things to my ruin do concur?
Father, and Daughter, Emperor all are joyn'd
To make me wretched, O the killing Flames,
Of a despairing passion, oh my heart!
Baj
My Miseries have giv'n me leave to smile
To see thee Traytor find an Hell on Earth
Man
Approach my Fair
Ast
Oh I am ruin'd, stain'd,
With hands scarce cool from my dear Brothers blood
He catches at the Sister for reward
And Im'e become a partner in the Murder
Baj
Oh the bold Ravisher, that he shou'd dare
To touch her—purge then Villain with thy blood
Her fully'd beauties, Dye
[Snatching a Sword from the Guards
Tam
Disarm the Traytor,
Presumptuous Fool, this Act has forfeited
The Life we gave
Baj
Have I driv'n Troops before me
And am I thus held in by a crowd of Slaves?
Vile, fearful Mice to pluck the bristled Main
Of a bound Lyon, rise, my Passion, rise
Swell every Vein up to an Artery
Return the famous Lightning of my Eyes,
Work, Oh my Heart, my Soul, in my revenge,
For I am kill'd, choak'd with disdain and fury
Tam
He Raves and we lose time to hear him, hast,
Take, force him from my sight
Baj
Do not think me King,
One that has nothing but a Life to lose;
Death! 'tis the common Scourge of coward minds,
A Goblin hatch'd to fright base vulgar Spirits
Life I contemn; nor wou'd I stoop so low
Beneath my Majesty to take it up,
Though with my Empire it might be redeem'd,
Since he must grant it whom I scorn and hate
A Grace from Tamerlane wou'd load with shame
My inward memory far more then all
My risled Crowns, or the base name of Slave
Now, Tyrant, to thy last destruction hear
What Alha moving in my breast Commands
Me speak, thy Glory, Tartar, is short liv'd,
There are a Royal Race of Ottemans,
(See thy Guards tremble at their very Name)
And so must thou, I see thy Glory sink
And Heav'n in Arms against thy Perjur'd Soul
Tam
A way to Death to speedy Torture with him
His boasted courage this last Act shall frye
Baj
Yes, I will make a Tryal of my Heart
I'le bear my wrongs with such a noble Courage
So far Transcending mean Tartarian spirits
That thou shalt burst with envy to my Fate
[Is led off
Man
Thus doth the Naked Beggar gazing stand
On great Mens wealth and starves, O cursed spight
That I must perish all my Joyes in sight
[Exit
A Wood
Arsanes, Axalla
Ars
Urge me no more, my Lord, my fate is seal'd,
And Heav'ns fixt will stands uncontroul'd by chance,
Now to return (by Heav'n I never will)
Were as to seek a second Banishment,
Or Death the lesser evil for returning
Ax
Yet Sir the King—
Ars
Is most unjust and cruel
Lead by the voice of every fawning Traytor,
And gives all power to him that Flatters most
My Brother! Yes, by all that's good it was
That fatal Brother, that ambitious Boy,
With the deep plotting Odmar wrought my ruine,
And built their greatness on my ill-tim'd Vertue,
While I—
Ax
While you here in inglorious sorrow
Quit your just Title to your Fathers Throne
Ars
A Throne Axalla, can it yet be news
My Father owns no Son but Mandricard?
He shares his Crowns of Lawrel and of Gold,
And all the shining Scepters of each Clime,
Where if a friend but chance to name Arsanes,
Or fetch an inward sigh for his misfortunes,
A pointed frown marks the kind Spirit dead,
And choaks with mournful groans his pious wishes
Oh my Nerina! —
Ax
That fever still, my Lord?
Ars
It like the Liver of the Earth-born Monster
O'respread nine Furlongs of the burning Lake
Feeds on the fiery Diet of fond hope,
To be renew'd a prey to black despair
Ax
Yet Sir she may be found
Ars
She may! O trifler, may!
May be is quite impossible to Love;
She must—ye Gods, appoint the happy time,
Like that when softest Hours in Greece I drew
Then when the Hospitable Emperor
Saluted us as Princes, treated us
At no less rate though both by Law enslav'd,
An exile I, and she a Pyrates prey
Long in that state we liv'd in Bliss and Love,
I Adanaxus, she Nerina call'd
But Oh, my Friend, that Golden Age is past!
Ax
Ah, my dear Lord—
Ars
Speak, Friend—
Ax
If any charm
Of specious truth your passion can o're sway
And raise belief in your distracted Breast,
The sight of her—
Ars
Do not Delude me thus
Ax
No false Delusion, or diverting Fable
Can here reside, take, take the naked truth,
Axalla in her rifled Tent beheld,
Gaz'd on, and knew the fair Nerina's charms
Ars
But did you see her like Nerina? bright
As the first Sun when on the Eastern Shore
He Rises fresh, and Decks the Infant Day
Did you behold among the Beauteous Crowd
One by all envy'd, and by all admir'd?
A Triple Goddess, Fair, Majestick, Wise?
Ax
Shee's all, my Lord, that ev'n your Love can speak her;
And though all bash'd and shrouded o're with Tears
Yet cou'd not ev'n those thickning Clouds of sorrow
Obscure the shining lustre of her Eyes
Ars
Methinks, my Friend, I see those Pearly drops
When taking on my Breast her last farewell,
She cast her Ivory Arms about my Neck,
And cry'd, my Love; Oh shou'd we meet again,
Nor spoke she this with the least sign of Bliss,
For with a Smile she promis'd it a truth
Ax
As great and faithful as the Sybills Voice,
And can you then, my Lord, leave all those Joyes
For want of seeking them? Think, think, Arsanes,
When this hot Fever has dry'd up to Ashes
Your slaming Heart, and Parcht your vital Spirits,
Then you will cry (but oh 'twill be too late)
What mass of Golden Treasure have I lost?
Then curse your self for your unkind distrust,
Your little Faith to your Axalla's Counsels,
That ruin'd the unfortunate Arsanes
But let's behold, the faithful Danches comes
[ Enter Danches
From your Great Fathers Court, his joyful look
Denotes some glad Discovery—The News?
Zan
Great Prince! what still may please, and make you happy,
I went to Samarcanda; but I pass'd,
Me thought, through Streets block'd up with moving Castles,
So thick, so numberles • the People stood
While they with Voices undistinguish'd fill'd
The Air, that Eccho'd nothing but the Stranger,
The Stranger is the business of the Court
The Sweet Discourse of every Ladies Mouth
Is, what the Stranger did; to you they owe
Their Trophies and their Fame
Ars
And is the Court so monstrously infectious,
That scarce an hour gone thou'st learnt to flatter?
Speak, speak thy Errand, what of the fair Nerina?
Zan
Great Sir! the Lady which your Friend discover'd
Is Daughter to th' impetuous Bajaset,
The tender sharer of her Fathers Fate
Ars
Ha! Withers not my Hand, start not my Eyes
From their curs'd Orbs?
Am I not all an Ague? So loud a Clap
Of sudden Thunder, and yet live? Ye Gods!
Have I to ruine her my Sword employ'd,
My greatest Strength her Country to destroy?
Was it her Father too whose Fate I sought?
Then on my self, my more than hellish act
I thus Revenge
[Draws his Dagger, which Axalla wrests from him
Ax
Dear Sir
Ars
'Twas friendly done
For I confess a death so quiet, and
So short, had been a Balm to ease my Heart,
Rather than punishment to expiate
My great offence; to die? perhaps the News
Might satisfie some Relicks of the War,
That their great Enemy is dead—What then?
What had I done for Bajaset? what for
His ruin'd House, his flaming Pallace? what
In lieu of all his pillag'd Scepters, Crowns?
What for Nerina 's wrongs, whose every Tear
Deserves a Life? No, no, Axalla, that
Which can but once be done, let it be long
In doing
Zan
Dear, my Lord, divert those thoughts
And go where Piety and Honour call
The Royal Slave not brooking his disgrace,
And yielding not himself to Tamerlane,
Is most unfaithfully condemn'd to Die
Ars
To Die? Shall then Nerina 's Father Die?
Basely and poorly be a prey to Fate?
And leave his weeping Daughter all alone,
'Midst a rude Multitude of Savage Men?
Ax
Arsanes cannot think a thought like that
Ars
No, my Axalla, hast we from this place
With all the swiftness of a Love in fear,
That he shall come too late, and lose the Prize,
The Beauteous Prize, for which all that have Souls
Must needs be Rivals; Guide me, O my Stars,
Shorten my Journey to my Paradise
By all my hopes Nerina 's Father lives;
Then snatching to my self the Glorious Prize,
I'le reap the Fruit of all my Victories
[Exeunt
ACT II. Scene I
Bajaset is discover'd on a Scaffold, an Executioner with an Axe, and others with Hallbirds, Swords, and c
Enter Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Abdalla. The Executioner being about to strike; Enter in hast Arsanes, and Axalla
Ars
HOld, stay thy bloody hand, I charge thee strike not
Tam
What bold Invader dares thus countermand me?
Speak, say, what art?
Ars
Lay down, O mighty Prince!
A little of thy Thunder, and I'le speak
O thou to whose high care Heav'n doth intrust
The Rule of Nations, Monarch of the Earth,
So may you Laurels bear from either Pole,
As you to them shall peaceful Olives joyn,
And in your Conquests God-like Mercy shew
Tam
The Accent of that Voice I sure have known;
Nor am I unacquainted with that Face
All day I could with patience hear thy Story
Ars
Not to recount the Changes of my Life,
Which but for one, one only happy Fate
Does not deserve a Name; yet, Sir, I'le tell you,
There's Glory in that Fate, and to have done
You Loyal Service, is a Noble Bliss
Tam
By all my Lawrels the Triumphant Stranger!
O Prince! for I consider thee no less;
What shall I, what Reward can I repay
To thy great Vertue?
Ars
Not a Thirst of Wealth,
Or Sacred Famine of Reward, or yet
A vain Ambition to commend my Deeds,
Made me presume to meet your Royal Eyes
But since, Great Sir, you do esteem my Acts
Worthy a price, O hear the Prayers I make;
By Alha, by the Soul of Mahomet,
By the ne'r-cancell'd Bond of your strict Vow
In Heav'ns bright Eye, I do conjure thee spare
The Royal Captives Life
Tam
Thou cou'd'st not ask
A thing but this, we cou'd not grant
Ars
O Heav'n!
If with a Princes Life you needs must Seal
The Glory of your Conquest, rip these Veins,
And draw what Blood is left in expiation
For his dear Life—Oh hold me not in doubt
Tam
Did I but think I did the Slave a favour,
Spight of my Vow by Heav'n he shou'd not live;
But as 'tis that he fears far worse than Death,
I by one Act will wisely satisfie
[Aside
This Strangers hopes, and glut my own Revenge,
Yes he shall live; remove the Fatal Pomp,
And lead him to our Palace; but know, Slave,
'Tis to this generous Prince thou owst thy Life
Baj
For me his Pray'rs; ye Stars shed ruine on him,
Beg in my Cause? Precacious Fool, be silent
[ To Ars
Ha.! Villain! why's my Fate so long delay'd,
[To the Exec
Is the Axe not sharp enough? or am I held
Here to be gaz'd at for a Mark, a Shew,
A Property to please the Idle Vulgar?
Strike Villain, or I'le spurn thee into Ashes
Ha, ha, ha, ha, O I could burst with laughter,
To see these Apes, these mistaken Fools,
Who think they have been generous and kind,
While they are dully cruel; Tyrant, blush,
And know, wer't thou my Slave, thus would I glut
My self with vengeance on thee, so farewell,
And some Plague seize thee e're we meet again
[Is led off
Tam
Thus to your Prayers we sacrifice our Justice,
And to your mighty Merits our Revenge
[ To Arsan
Ars
Thus at your Royal Feet I cast my self,
And may those Pow'rs that rais'd and guard your Throne
Reward you for this greatest highest favour,
For which I vow you everlasting Service
Man
Hail, O great Soul of War, matchless in Might!
Odm
Fair Guardian Angel of the Scythian Throne
Abd
Desire of Nations, Bulwark of this State
Ars
Your Vassal, Princes, knows not to bear
These loads of Praise, unable to repay
Your noble kindness ev'n in Thanks
Man
So may
You always knit fresh Lawrels to your Brow,
As we to you our Turkish Conquests owe
Tam
'Tis true, I as a Warrior must adore
Thee in thy Vertues, thy Success admire,
Thy Actions love, reward thy Loyalty
But something nearer calls thee to my Breast,
Stamps thy dear Image on my Soul, and tells me,
There is a mightier reason for my love
Than any I have yet alledged. O Nature,
My Eyes, my Heart, both challenge thee, my Son!
Ars
Father, if I may dare to use that Name,
[Pulling off his disguise
Behold your wretched Son, your Darling once;
Now less than Stranger to you, banish'd, spoil'd
Of all my Honours, Father, Country, Name,
By their vile Arts, who with false Counsels arm'd
Against my Innocence your mildest Nature
Here could I wish I were for ever fix'd,
Here breath my last, and leave my flying Soul
Tam
Ye Powrs, my Son, the wrong'd Arsanes here!
Heav'n knows with what regret I rob my Throne of
So great a Pillar, my Kingdom of so good
A Prince; Heaven knows how I have mourn'd thy absence,
And curs'd my fond belief to busy Flatterers
Credit me, Prince, I always thought thee injur'd
Odm
O damn'd, deceitful, spightful Queen of Chance
Man
Hell, that I as a Basilisk cou'd dart
Poison from my Eyes, and blot his growing Greatness
[Aside
Tam
O Mandricard! my other Blessing, share
This mass of Joy that fills my heaving Breast
Man
And can the Stranger prove so near a Friend?
A Brother? Oh that Name! Now by my Arms,
If ever hate were grounded in my Breast,
You Valiant Deeds have dispossess'd it all
Such Vertue ne'r can find an Enemy
[Imbraces coolly
Now all the subtilest Plagues of Hell prevent thee
[Aside
Ars
O happy day! the whitest of my Life
Tam
All who are present at this Solemn Meeting,
Behold your Prince, your wish'd for Prince Arsanes;
In whose just Cause you have so often mutinid,
And ev'n assail'd our Throne for his revenge ▪
Receive, take, share with me his Royal Heart,
And with loud shouts of Joy accompany
Us to our Palace: Thus from their sad Urn
Thy Phoenix Vertues to new Glories burn
[Exeunt
Odmar manet solus
Odm
Furies and Death, and all the Family
Of dark Infernal Pow'rs, can you see,
So tamely see me your Chief Instrument
Sworn to your Counsels, so lost, so successless?
For this?
Have I trod in all Paths that Hell-ward led?
Has Envy lost her Snakes, and Fraud forgot
Her Art? Is Malice satisfi'd so soon
To glare, and snarl, and not destroy? for this
Have Guilty Thoughts disturb'd my Nights, and Blood
Started my Soul in Fancies, broke my Sleeps
Bled the Kings Son committed to my charge,
An Infant to no-purpose; is it nothing
That my Themyre supplies his Place, and Name?
But doth Arsanes still prevent us? Nay,
He's grown much higher by his fall; our Plots
To tread him down to Earth have mounted him
Above the Clouds. This must not on, again
Brain whet thy sweet Invention, while he climbs,
That he may fall, and set the World in Flames
[Exit
Asteria's Apartment
Asteria, Zayda
Ast
Give, give my Passion vent, or I shall burst;
Yes, yes, ye Pow'rs 'twas he, 'twas Adanaxus
That ruin'd me, my Father, Country, all
'Tis the same charming Tongue moves Tamerlane,
That caught Nerina 's Heart, just so he wept,
And knelt, and pray'd for Mercy at my Feet
For his own Life; as for my Father's, now
▪ Tis the same Rival of Andronicus,
The same Triumpher o're the Graecian Slaves,
Turkey destroy'd. I and this faithless Man,
Crown'd with the Pleasures of a Smiling Field,
While we each others Story did relate
So tenderly, and with so much concern,
Promiscuously we gave our Hearts away,
Born on the Wings of interchang'd Discourse
Then first we sigh'd and smil'd, and smil'd and sigh'd,
And look'd, and wonder'd, and discours'd again,
While the young God stood laughing on the Plain,
And wonder'd at our Sympathy of Souls
Wou'd you believe it? This same Under-Lover,
This very Adanaxus, from the World,
From all Mankind, was chose to work my ruine
Zay
Has he not sav'd your Captive Fathers Life?
Ast
Did he not make him so? O trifling Comfort!
How now, what Air, what Heav'n is this, what Sky,
What Country? whither am I led? alass,
What am I now become? Still, still my Eyes
Behold those various Images of Death,
And Fatal Ruine they in Prutia saw
All pale, and shiv'ring there my Mother lies,
And there my Royal Brother bleeding groans;
All this and more this dear, this trayt'rous Man,
This smiling false Deceiver has perform'd
To them Arsanes, Axalla
Ax
See there, my Lord, and think on what your Friend
Advis'd you to
Ars
I see my Heav'n near,
Am ravish'd with the light, wish, and admire,
Court and hope, yet dare not enter in
With such a clog of guilt incumber'd round,
I tremble at the Presence of my Judge
Ax
If Conquest were a Crime it was the Gods,
Not yours; nor can she blame your hidden fate;
How full of Fears is Love?
Ast
Bless me my Stars,
Oh I'm betray'd, look, Zayda, see that Man,
Oh let us shun that swearing, perjur'd Man,
And never let me trust my Heart again
Ars
Madam—
Ast
What means this rude Assault?
Ars
Thus low I fall
To Beauties and to Mercies Shrine, while from
Their Oracle I learn my Life or Death,
Present Despair or Happiness
Ast
Expound
These Riddles, Heav'n!
Ars
Ha! am I grown so strange
So alter'd, neither known, nor understood?
Or rather are you so forgetful grown?
If so, let these recall your Memory,
[A Bracelet
The Tender Labour of your busie Love
This witness of your Vows
Ast
What shall I say, or do?
Ungrateful Man!—but let me not recall
My Grief with Words, and stab my bleeding Wounds
The Gods revenge my Injuries—
[Is going out
Ars
Oh hear
Your Guilty Penitent his Crime confess
Ast
Some weak Evasion, or deluding Fable;
Oh what excuse, or wile, can you invent,
In recompence of all my Sufferings?
Ars
Her every word a bleeding Heart-string cuts,
Her every Tear a Vein; your Sufferings?
Oh cast on me the burden of 'em all;
For I can bear for my. Nerina's quiet
The Pains of Hell, with Heav'nly delight
Ast
Ill shall I trust so known an Enemy
Ars
An Enemy! what Horrors seize my Soul?
Oh clear, clear me of that wretched Name
Who could have thought the Ridling Fates and meant
I shou'd have sin'd in bringing help to him
Who gave me birth?
Ast
'Tis plain you have betray'd,
For empty Duty have betray'd your Love
What Name could make Nerina to forget
Her Adanaxus thus—? ah cruel Man!
Ars
Forget you? had I drunk dull Lethe dry,
Its Waters had on me wrought small effect
Nerina always was, is present here,
My Mind, my Soul is nothing but Nerina
This very impious Act was for Nerina,
When losing her, I sought in dreadful Battle
My long wish'd End
Ast
Excuses are but vain;
For by your Actions I your kindness weigh ▪
Captivity, and shameful Bands are all
The mighty Gifts of your protested Vows
Have I not heard you say? yes, I have heard,
To me the Tribute of the World was due,
How fit I was to be a Queen, how well
A Diadem wou'd with my Beauty Suit
Ars
Oh my Nerina, if I then must stand
Guilty of all the malice of the Stars,
And what great Heav'n decreed, if it be nothing
That by my Pray'rs your Royal Father lives
Yet sure I've lov'd, and for your love despis'd
All dangers, oppos'd Princes in your Cause;
Witness the Fury of Andronicus;
Nerina may remember too some Months
Imprisonment, harsh Chains, and hardest usage
Ast
How quickly passes a Womans Rage that loves!
[Aside
Now could I lay on Fortune all his Crimes,
Oh Adanaxus —but I have been wrong'd
[Turning from him
Ars
Then Heav'n o'retake me with thy swiftest Justice;
While from your Mouth I here beg leave to die
Ast
Oh how I melt to Tenderness and Love!
I cannot now dissemble with my Heart,
Nor curb my Passion with a seeming Fierceness
Ah, my dear Lord—
Ars
Pronounce the Fatal Sentence
Ast
While your Nerina lives you must not die,
Your Life is link'd with hers
Ars
And can I hope
For Absolution?
Ast
If you've any Faith,
See, see it Seal'd, while I due Thanks repay
To Heav'n, which has restor'd my dearest Lord;
By this one Gift my Stars have recompenc'd me,
For Mother, Brother, Father, Country, all
Ars
Such words as these mix'd with that Grace of Speech,
Wou'd charm the praying Hermite from his Cell,
And draw the rigid Cynick's Heart to Love
Ast
But see, we are observ'd—
[ Mandricard passes over the Stage
Ars
'Tis Mandricard,
That Raven bodes ill Fate
Man
Ha! what so close
Billing? believe me Brother, 'tis too much
Ast
Did not you mark his black disorder'd Looks?
Between his gnashing Teeth what silent Curses
He mutter'd forth, and threatned us with Frowns?
Ars
Though he were arm'd with Lightning we'd not fear
Ast
Again then we must part—
Ars
So willingly?
Ast
Part now to meet again with greater Joys,
More Ravishing Delights; mean while we'l live
On hope
Ars
And nourish Nature with the Thoughts
Of Joys to come; now drive thy Chariot, Time,
Incumbent on the Wings of all the Winds;
Nor cease thy flying Pages to maintain,
While I and my Nerina meet again
[Exeunt
A Garden belonging to the Palace
Mandricard alone
Man
Dull, Coward Heart, weak Flesh, and what is worse,
A Mind ambitious, yet without revenge
Rise, Mandricard, let not thy Glory sink
In vain Complaints, and feeble Murmurings
By this I shou'd have fill'd the World with Ruine,
And on its Fall my early Glory built
By all my Fury I cou'd laugh to feel
The ruin'd Palace crush my burthen'd Limbs,
So that Arsanes might partake my Fate
To him Odmar, Abdalla
Odm
A happy Morning to my Gracious Lord!
Man
Gods, that I live to see this hateful day!
No Serpent wing'd, or Dragon-breathing-flame
Cou'd raise my Soul to this unbounded rage,
As doth Arsanes Presence; O ye Furies
Prepare some sudden deadly Pest to blast him
Odm
He's fir'd, and now to blow him into Flames—
Busie, my Lord, and full of rowling thoughts?
Man
Dost thou not see Revenge hang on my Brow?
Odm
Divide the heavy burthen of your Breast,
And witness for me, Hell, there's not a Path
That leads to your Ambition, vast desires,
Your Odmar dares not tread to make you happy,
Though with the fatal hazard of his Life
Abd
Speak but the word, and I'm a true born Son
Of Scythian breed, can strangle, poison, kill,
When e're your Interest shall arm my Fury
Man
Now these are Men according to my wish,
[Aside
First swear to keep the Secret—
Both
Shou'd it be
To blaspheme Mahomet, we swear
Man
Why sticks
My Tongue to speak the happy Deed my Mind
Long since has acted? were you bred in Blood,
And nurs'd with Milk of Tygers, have you each
Murder'd your Thousands?
Abd
All my Life has been
But a continual practice how to kill
Most silent, and most sure,
Odm
I from my Youth
Have conversant in Plots and Treasons been,
And artfully have study'd by the fall
Of Men above me, how to raise my self
To highest Place, and Power
Man
Instruments
As fit as Hell cou d make, for my Design
How long shall I, like some vile Shrub beneath
A spreading Oak, stand overshadow'd by
Arsanes mighty Pow'r?
Abd
Does it hit there? this Steel
Has entred Brass, and cut through Coats of Mail,
And will serve still to lop or branch or so
From that tall Oak
Odm
We'l take it by the Roots
Man
His Heart
Odm
And drink his Blood
Abd
And eat the Corse
Man
Like Tartars spoke; the Means?
Abd
By force of Arms
Odm
By Stratagem, Fate-working Stratagem
Then first the Captive Princes, to deceive
Must be our care, that she in spight of all
The tenderness she to Arsanes bears,
Be brought into your Arms a Glorious Prey
Man
That serves but for one half of my revenge,
That for my Love, but what for my Ambition?
Odm
You have no sooner thought, but I have acted;
Lyes are the steps by which black Treason climbs
Confederacy with Turkey, dark Designs
With Bajaset, and contracts with the Princess
This Head, that Hand can fail in no Attempt
Abd
Where you the Platform lay, I swear to build
Man
My Noble Lords, now you are Friends indeed,
I envy not Arsanes now with all
His crowd of supple Flatterers, that cringe
And buz about his new-reviving Greatness;
Let them speak Friendship which you act, and now
To our great Charges silent as the night,
And hush'd as our Designs, we go; Farewell
[ Exeunt Odm. Abd
'Tis sure, these Men with Trayterous Designs
To the destructive part may much avail
But on what Ground to build my happy Love,
And how to gain the Fair Asteria 's Heart,
Instruct me, Alha; O Prince, 'tis enough,
Enough thou see'st to gain her mortal hate,
That by thy cursed Hand her Brother fell;
What will she say?—but oh what canst thou say
In thy excuse? when by thy Hellish Arts
She hears Arsanes basely, poorly Murder'd?
Yet, Mandricard, cheer up thy drooping Spirits,
She loves the Man that sought her Fathers ruine,
By Heav'n her Brothers Murd'rers less in fault
'Tis fix'd; and on that hope I build my Bliss
To him Ispatia
Isp
I wou'd not harbour such a jealous thought
Within my Breast; can Mandricard prove false
To his Ispatia, O unequal Gods!
Prevent this mischief; what disast'rous chance
Has summon'd me to this unhappy place
With Eyes and Ears, to see and hear his falshood,
To which my Soul cou'd never credit give?
But yet I'le smother it, and try if words,
With all the force of Tears, may turn his mind
Health to my Noble Lord, Great Mandricard,
How fares your Highness?
Man
Well, Ispatia, well,
The better that I hear thee ask me so;
But I am busie now, leave me, Ispatia
Isp
My Lord!
Man
I prithee leave me,
We shall have idle hours enough for Love
Isp
How, my dear Lord? I little did expect
To meet you thus on this Triumphant Day
Man
Blame then the Fates, not me
Isp
Doth any Wound
Disturb your Rest, my Lord? If so, behold
Your weak Physitian, do not scorn my help
Man
Thanks to your care, your Mandricard is whole
Isp
My Care? O trifling word—He shou'd have cast
Away that cool Endearment on the Crowd
That fawn'd, and welcom'd him at his return
Are all my longing Wishes come to this?
And is it, is it thus, I must receive you,
Is this the Fruit of all my early Moans,
And Midnight-sighs, when shall I hope for Rest
If I must now despair?
Man
The Curses of
A Wife are most unsufferable, now cou'd I—
Isp
Are not my broken Slumbers worth a Look?
Not one kind word for all my long Complaints?
One Smile wou'd be as much as I dare claim,
Though I cou'd wish for Millions
Man
Give me leave
I prithee to repose my self a while;
'Twill add a fresh, and stronger Life to Love
Heav'ns! is she senseless?
Isp
And can Mandricard
Think me unwilling to partake his Grief
That I have always done; and when I heard
Of any Princes Fate, half dead with fear,
I listen'd with impatience for the Truth
Of all the Story of my Life or Death,
Lest Mandricard shou'd prove that hapless Prince
But still those fears did joyfully deceive
My Heart, reviving with the welcome News,
The dear, dear hopes of seeing you again,
So Great, so Glorious!
Man
Oh that my inward Pray'rs
Cou'd move with pity some relenting Pow'r
To raise a Mountain, or a Sea betwixt us;
And snatch me from the Daggers of her Tongue
Isp
Believe me, Prince, you over-load my Soul
With Thoughts of what shou'd move such discontent,
Knowing the innocency of my Breast
Man
You'r not in fault, Ispatia, give me leave
To think on those who are
Isp
If to be freed
From your Ispatia 's company be Rest,
Then I'le not rob you of those pleasing Minutes;
Though I could willingly for Ages gaze
O're all that Field of awful Majesty,
And wonder how it ever open lay
To entertain so poor, so mean a Love
I go, my Lord, and leave you to your Rest;
For which I would all Joy, all Bliss resign,
Your Rest which me delights, for it is mine
[Exit
Man
So, is she gone at last, then farewell Wife,
And welcome Love, thou highest Bliss of Life
While through my Rivals Heart I cut my way,
And with a Mistress my past dangers pay
And this fond Wretch shall the sweet War begin,
Arsanes shall conclude the Bloody Scene,
I'le, while they groan in death, enjoy my Queen
ACT III
Ispatia sola,
Isp
HE's gone, he's fled like Water shrunk away,
The more I strove to hold him fast; Curst Fate!
When every Matron sprightfully with fresh Joys,
And every Virgin full of harmless mirth,
Share the glad Pastimes of this happy day;
Happy to all but me, whom one wou'd think
Its Triumphs most concern'd, since Mandricard
Bears all its mighty weight of crowding Honours,
The haughty Conqueror Tartary adores
Yet after all his far-blown Victories,
I blush to say this Great, this Glorious Man
Is vanquish'd, vanquish'd even by his Slave,
And wears the Fetters of a Captive Maid
But sure I have misconstrued all he said;
He did but try me, my Eyes dazeled
When I beheld his Gestures, when I thought
I see him frown, I'le not believe my Thoughts,
Poor Womens Thoughts are wandring Iealousies;
We fancy, dream, and real things suppose
Yet go thou silent trial of my Fate,
[The Letter
Her Characters I've here exactly drawn,
And every Letter subtilly have copy'd,
Which might I think deceive Arsanes self,
Which he might see, and not perceive the Cheat
But oh why do I thus delay my Wishes!
Within there, Hamzeh, trusty Slave, appear
[ Enter Hamzeh
Ham
Most Honour'd Princess, what's your great Command?
Isp
Provide this Letter carefully be sent,
As from Asteria, to your Royal Lord,
Be gone; and wing to Mandricard your way,
Each minute seems an hour, each hour a day
[Exeunt
The Palace
Enter Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla
Tam
Make me believe as soon the Stars are faln
Abd,
Yet, Sir, with any but a Fathers Eyes
Black discontent is seen to hover o're
His darken'd Brow, his wild unstable Looks
May render him suspitious
Tam
Wash thy Mouth ▪
Thou foul Fomenter of suggested Lies,
And politick Deceit, think not you, Slaves,
We'r ignorant from whom this Message comes
Abd
See what your Plotting comes to
[To Odmar aside
Odm
Dreaded Prince!
This Tongue was never known to fill your Ears
With painted fraud, and poisonous deceit,
My Counsels hitherto ev'n you have thought
Loyal and wise, and grave as Cicero 's,
And have preserv'd your Happiness as much
As his did Romes —yet, Sir, your Slave
Confesses all his Projects had been vain,
Had not your Vertue perfected those Actions,
Of which we but the bare Idea shew'd
Abd
What's all this to Arsanes?
[Aside
Tam
Speak thy Thoughts,
And do not flatter, nor thy self, nor me,
Thy Words fly wide from all thy former Sense;
Thou nam'dst Arsanes, tedious Slave, proceed
Odm
Now witness for me all ye Pow'rs Divine,
And thou that know'st the Secrets of my Heart,
Punish me strangely, Alha; if I speak
Ought that I fear'd to speak before the Altar,
Or swear it on the Alcoran for truth
Abd
He's at his Pray'rs now, sure his Conscience bites him,
Heav'n, he'l confess, we're ruin'd
Tam
Odmar, rise,
Give me but patience, Gods, to hear him out
Odm
Though loath, I must unfold the burning Secret,
Both for my Conscience, and my Country's sake;
The proud Arsanes, jealous of the Love
You show deservedly to Mandricard,
Bears mighty Projects in his lab'ring Brain,
Envy, Revenge, with all that nat'ral hate
He ows his Brother, stir him up against
The Laws of Man, and Nature; his Ambition
Flies Sir no lower a pitch, than at your Crown
Abd
Ha! I begin to find him, he talks Sense!
Tam
Now, Villain, give me Proof, substantial Reason
For what the poison of thy Gall has vented,
Or else by Heav'n thou dy'st
Abd
Ha! goes it so;
Villain, and Death! Plague of your Stratagems
Odm
Scars will remain after their Wounds are whole;
The highest Palaces stand most to view,
And are most look'd at, when their Lustre fades
Arsanes cannot brook his late disgrace,
And thou forgiven, blushes with disdain
That he was banish'd; scarce an hour ago
The Valiant Mandricard in Pious Suit
Sought Reconcilement with his raging Brother
Abd
This does not sound like truth, it has no face
Of Probability
[ To Odm
Odm
When in a lone
And vacant place we found your Royal Son
But oh how chang'd from what he fain wou'd seem,
Must'ring up such a train of impious words,
And bitter curses; Heav'n, we cou'd scarce believe
It had been he; but strait approaching nigher,
We over-heard him in a murmuring Tone
Say thus; The House of Ottoman shall soon regain
Its Empire by that Arm it newly fell;
Hearing all this, the pious Mandricard
Came near, saluted low the proud Arsanes;
He frown'd, and lifted high his haughty Head,
Then flung away, and left us in amazement
Tam
'Twas done as to his well-known Enemies,
And, Traytor, was it not that Loyal Son,
That brave Arsanes? (whom by Heav'n I'm proud
That he should call me Father) was't not he,
Who spight of all the base indignities,
Under whose load he sunk to banishment,
Came with new Strength so wonderfully fierce?
So unexpected was all kind of Succour,
Not one among our gazing Troops,
Scarce I my self, but thought him Mahomet
Odm
Too well, dread Prince, he fought, if all were known,
He has already half eclips'd your Fame,
Witness all Tartary, which bowing low,
Kisses the very Ground on which he treads
Do not you hear Arsanes mighty Name
Eccho'd through every Street, long live Arsanes,
A Thousand Voices ev'n in your Court reply,
While Tamerlane must stand neglected by,
And wait upon the Triumphs of his Son
Abd
By Hell thou art the very Soul of lying
Odm
Nay more I fear, it is no false report,
The specious Acts he wrought in your defence,
Cut but his way into your Peoples Hearts,
And a wide Path to his Ambition made
This I may safely swear, my Lord, he's false
Abd
The same swear I
Tam
You both are Villains,
False, treacherous, perjur'd, damn'd Villains,
Whose spotted Souls regard not Innocence,
Nor Conscience trembles, when you dare accuse it
And now to let you know how little Faith
Your seeming Counsels fix upon my Soul,
Call here the Prince Arsanes —spight of yours
And Mandricards more hateful Policies,
I'le Crown his Vertue with Rewards so large,
Shall raise your envy high, as is his Fate
Enter Arsanes
Come to my Arms my best, my Loyal Son,
Let me embrace thee all, my long-wish'd Joys
At last are come; rise my better self
See there the Authors of thy former woes,
See them, that wou'd renew thy Miseries;
Villain, is this a Face shews discontent,
What wild unstable looks are here, what frown,
What gesture that may render him suspected?
Ars
I always thought those Men my Enemies;
Yet I confess, Great Sir, I have deserv'd
All that their envy or your juster wrath
Have made me suffer: For whom e're he be
So just a Prince thinks false, or but suspects,
By Heav'n he's false; nay then 'tis a Crime,
A Crime unpardonable in innocence
To say she's wrong'd
Abd
He has a Tongue as smooth
[To Odmar aside
As yours, pray Heav'n it may but prove as fatal
Tam
You false, believe me; nor thy Conqueror
Your injur'd Vertue claims a Recompence
So large, with guilty thoughts I blushing hear,
That now to share that Empire you have sav'd,
With that your Arms have won, will be a light,
An empty Offering to your vast deserts;
Men stile us Scythians barbarous and wild,
But I appeal to the Immortal Pow'rs,
If ever Rome in all her Pomp cou'd show
An Act like what Arsanes has perform'd
An Act so good, Athens wou'd blush to hear,
As wanting fit example to compare
An Act to brave the Heroes from their Orbs,
The famous Senate of unconquer'd Minds,
Start back, and think their Glory faintly won,
So much Arsanes has surpass'd their Deeds
An Act—
Ars
Of which I thought the insolence
Might rather raise your Anger, than your Love,
To see an Exil'd Slave, who durst return
Uncall'd to share the Trophies of your Fame
Yet let me plead but this in my defence,
My Duty to so just a Father, and
So good a Prince, work'd high my ravish'd Soul,
Nor could my Blood be chill'd with outward fear,
Or inward grief, but boyling in my Veins,
As one shou'd say 'twas part of Tamerlanes,
Stir'd me to go where Fame and Duty call'd
Abd
Ruin'd as handsomely as Hell cou'd wish us
Tam
Now in the Face of thy worst Enemies
Receive the highest Honours we can give;
Let loose thy vast Ambition, let it fly
At Riches, Honour, Love, or once at all
Your Word shall guide our Heart, your Wishes bind
Our Will; your Pray'rs command what e're they crave,
Ask, and believe it granted e're you speak
Abd
Now cou'd I cut thy Throat instead of his
[ To Odm
Ars
Lawrels, and Crowns are Tamerlanes alone,
And the Rich Entrails of the Golden Earth
Serve but to fill the Lustre of his Name
It is, Great Sir, a light Request I make,
And yet in my esteem worth Worlds, so great
A Prize the fair Asteria seems to me,
That were I seated on the Scythian Throne,
With swarms of Tributary Kings about me,
And subject Princes waiting my Commands,
By all my wishes I shou'd scarce enjoy
One moments rest, without the beauteous Bride
Tam
Ye Gods, that ever such antipathy
Shou'd be united; Oh cou'd I but taste
The sleepy Waters of dull Lethe 's Lake,
That I might now forget those hateful words
I tell thee, Prince, thy fond Request is vain,
Which nor consists with Duty, nor with Honour
She is thy Enemy, Arsanes, cease
To think of her
Odm
Take Heart, Abdalla, see,
The Prince is Planet-struck, and Tamerlane
Pursues his ruine
Ars
Duty bids me not
Dispute your dread Commands, yet I must blame
The coldness of my Stars, and too hard Fate
Tam
It is not fancy sure disturbs my mind,
And leads my wav'ring thoughts to jealousie;
Yet I cou'd shun thee now, Arsanes, here
Thy dark Request sticks deep: Farewell, and when
You make your next, if not as a Son,
Ask what is fitting for a Friend
[Exit
Abd
'Tis just,
As Hell and we cou'd wish
Odm
Now is our time,
To shed out all our Poison on his Soul,
Which Heav'n nor Arsanes may controul
[Exeunt
Ars
Now from a fairest Heav'n of surest hope
Am I thus faln? O sudden turn of Fortune!
Quite ruin'd e're I scarce perceiv'd a Change
Thus stands some mighty Tower, the Bulwark of
A Nation, shooting up her lofty Head
Above the Clouds, gaz'd and wonder'd at,
But in a moment see to Ashes turn'd
Its tot'ring pride on some base Traytors Guilt,
And scarce the marks of all its Glory left
Thus—But oh the Star that guilds my days
She comes; and now my fading sorrows pass,
Like showry Clouds before the Glorious Sun
Enter Asteria
Ast
My dearest Lord, so may you find all Joys
My Heart can wish you, as you shall unfold
The Mystick Secret of that sad Complaint
Just now you sent to Heav'n
Ars
Most impious were I
Could I while I possess those numerous Worlds
Of fullest pleasures hanging o're your Brow,
Those endless Comforts basking in your Eyes,
And all the Charms which wait upon your Smile,
Ungratefully and foolishly complain
Pard'n me ye Pow'rs, if I have offended,
For to Arsanes you are wond'rous kind,
Most bountiful, who in the fair Nerina
All I can ask, all I can wish, have giv'n
Ast
Yes, Adanaxus, we are free to love,
And I without a crime can give a Heart,
With Honour, Duty, and a Fathers Will
Ars
What is't I hear? what sudden happiness
Raps my glad Soul?
Ast
'Tis true, as strange
Ars
O Bliss!
O Harmony! but how the wond'rous Change
Was wrought, dulls all my busie thoughts to guess
Ast
Then first I knelt, and wept, and kiss'd his Feet,
And told how I had been his Darling from
My very Infancy, and what Delights
My Childish Sports afforded him—how dear
He priz'd my Mother, made him sensible
Of his past Joys with her, and then conjur'd him
By her blest Ashes, and Eternal Name,
To have compassion on me
Ars
Words like these
Wou'd charm the rav'ning Wolf with hunger pinch'd,
With a strange softness to forego his Prey,
And make him tender as the panting Lamb
Ast
But yet the joyful Grant he had not seal'd,
When once again I did embrace his Knees,
And call'd to his remembrance how he liv'd
By your kind intercession, though he scorns
The Life you gave; yet frankly he confess'd
It was a Noble pity in a Mind
So great as yours
Ars
Oh the Angelick Sound!
Cou'd yet the moving Argument be vain?
Ast
It was, my Lord, till turning to a Theme
Of more concern, I told him I lov'd,
How I was lov'd, with what a generous Flame
You answered my Affections, how by you
I was protected from the violence
Of rash Andronicus; and then he smil'd
And said 'twas nobly done, and as a Lover
Ars
And yet cou'd he deny? Oh what remain'd,
What cou'd you farther urge?
Ast
Your Noble Acts,
Your constant Vertue, and unviolate Faith,
How weighing not your wrongs then thick upon you,
Banish'd by your great Fathers jealous rage,
Your Loyal Vertue still unshook, unconquer'd,
Brought Kingdoms to his Throne, and Lawrels to his Head
This he was strangely taken with, and lost
Much of his fury; wondred, and grew kind,
And swore he cou'd not be a Foe to Vertue
Of so sublime a Nature, then he rose,
And gave a soft Command, and charg'd me love you,
Not as a Prince, not as the Tyrants Son,
But something more than Man, and nearer to the Gods
Ars
Thus kneel kind Angels at the Feet of Heav'n,
When ready to destroy the impious World,
They with soft Pray'rs recall the bolted Thunder,
And ev'n o're-take the swiftest Lightnings Course
Blest that I am in thy most charming, sweet,
Prevailing Oratory; thus cou'd we move
But Tamerlanes far more obdurate Heart,
Then were we blest
Ast
Then were we blest indeed
Enter Zayda confus'dly, and in hast
Zay
O dismal Chance, O fatal Destiny!
Ast
What means this dreadful Voice, not Croaking Ravens,
With Midnight-shreiks, e're thus disturb'd my Soul
Zay
Your Father—
Ast
Say, what can his ill-tim'd Fate,
Malicious Chance, and inauspicious Stars,
Do to advance his full-blown Spring of Sorrow?
Zay
Unheard-of Cruelty! the Faithless Tyrant,
Incens'd by your great Fathers haughty Rage,
Who though in Chains, with his great Spirit frights
The Jealous King, and with a Princely scorn
Vexes his raging Soul; which to Revenge,
Fierce Tamerlane (O cruel Artifice!)
Lock'd in an Iron Cage his Rival Slave,
While he in barbarous Triumph mounted on
His Shoulders to his Chariot
Ars
Savage Prince
Ast
O Cruelty! Oh more than Hellish Torment!
Zay
Impatient of his wrongs, the Royal Captive,
As he through Samarcanda 's Streets was led
A publick Trophy in his moving Prison,
Against the massy Bars with rage he dash'd
His Royal Head, while from the fatal Wound
Gush'd out that Blood, which long the greatest Life
The World cou'd ever proudly boast preserv'd,
Who in a Storm of—
Ast
O I faint, I faint,
To hear you out will send my Soul away,
E're I can to his Fate my Duty pay
Farewell, my Lord
Ars
O my dearest Life,
Let me, let me support thy fainting Beauties
Ast
O Adanaxus, now we'r lost again
Ars
Unhappy Fate! thus ever in our Joys
A sudden Thunderbolt divides us
[Exeunt severally
Enter Mandricard alone with a Letter
Man
What shall I do? shall I not go? not now?
When thus the true Idea of that Face
Calls my glad Soul, which we adore in Angels?
(Great Mandricard, I'le sing thee in my Lap)
[Reading
I come, I come, Asteria, Mercury,
Lend me thy winged Buskins, that in thought
I may in swiftness penetrate the Air
O welcome, welcome be thou to my Soul,
I kiss thee for her sake, whose Ivory Hands
Have deep engrav'd these Golden Characters
To him Ispatia unseen
Isp
So now, Ispatia, thou hast view'd his Heart,
And seen it flaming with another Dart;
Then to compleat the Sum of all my Pains,
Death is the only Torment that remains
Exit
Man
To thee, sweet Saint, I come, I fly to thee
But what ill Fates have intercepted me?
[Enter Arsanes
Arsanes here? wou'd Hell it were his Ghost,
Now by my Arms a far more welcome sight
Yet now for my defence a well-forg'd Lie,
With a false shew of Penitential Kindness,
Will be most exquisite
[Coming near and bowing to Arsanes
Ars
What wou'd this Woman?
Man
Ha!
Ars
Art thou
Offended with the Name, then change the Art
For all I yet can see in thee is Woman,
Forc'd Tears, feign'd Flatteries, and deep Dissembling,
These seldom sure possess a Manly Breast
Man
If ought I've done, can be by what I'le do—
Ars
There's death in thy deceitful Eyes and Tongue
Man
Deceit, and Death, what mean those Mystick words,
Which strike like double Daggers to my Heart?
Ars
Art thou not false?
Nan
Destructive Fame, thy worst
Blow all thy lying Trumpets through the World,
And to all Ears pronounce me false, yet not
The blasting Breath of all thy hundred Mouths
Can on my injur'd Vertue cast a blot
Ars
The Careful Pilot riding on the Main,
May tack about, and shun the highest Rocks;
But those he fears which skulk beneath the Waves,
The unseen Instruments of grinning Death
You work my ruine, not with Hand, but Heart,
The lurking Treasure of black Designs
Man
Had I by any other Man been drawn
In such a Character, so much unlike,
So inconsistent with a Princely Mind,
That Man had with his final ruine brought
Swift vengeance on himself for what he said;
By Heav'n! had he but thought it, he had dy'd
With you quite otherwise I beg my peace,
Nature commands you seal my happiness
Ars
Ha! are the Wounds I bear so light?
Man
What Wounds?
This Tongue, this Heart, and Hand are innocent
Ars
Ask'st thou what Wounds? So did fell Atreus ask
His fainting brother, drunk with humane Blood,
And heavy with the weight of his own Bowels
Set to him as a Banquet; what he ail'd
I tell thee Brother, 'twas wretched thing,
An exil'd Slave, and Heir to Tamerlane
Man
Is that not blotted out? I'le hear no more;
Since you my Friendship, and my love contemn,
I scorn all Treaties of a further Peace
Come on, Revenge; like Wolves, and spotted Tygers
We'l live together in perpetual strife,
And when we meet it must be always War
Of which be this the Sacred, binding Gage
Throw him the Letter and Exit
Ars
'Twas boldly spoke, and much unlike himself,
He ne'r profess'd himself my Foe till now
To him Axalla
Ax
Saw you not Mandricard, my Lord?
Ars
I did;
Behold this witness of his treacherous hate
[Opening the Letter
Dazle my Eyes? or is it from Asteria?
What sudden madness seizes my lost Senses?
And makes me think what is impossible?
'Tis all delusion—Ha—from my Nerina!
Directed too to Mandricard? Oh Heav'n!
At her Apartment
Ax
Oh the Monster Woman!
Ars
'Tis sure some feign'd device!
Ax
Her own false Hand,
Her Hand that writes her Hearts unconstant Love
Ars
How oft have I such tender Characters,
Of the same size and make, lock'd in my Breast,
And kiss'd and worship'd 'em like little Idols
They'r like—what though they are? so polish'd Glass
Resembles Chrystal mimically Fair,
And is not so
Ax
But Women are most Women
When they are truly Hypocrites
Ars
But my Nerina, glory of her Sex,
How have I always thought her more than Woman!
In whom th' Almighty Painter had exprest
The Fairest Pattern of exactest Angels,
Her Soul he drew the very Lively Image
Of some bless'd Saint, or ever-happy Martyr;
But oh she of that Rank of Angels Proves,
Whose due Commission's only to destroy,
Arm'd with fierce Judgments of the Wrath Divine
Ax
Then shun those Judgments which you see so nigh,
So plain, so manifest, and now shou'd you—
Ars
I cannot, and I pray thee do not curse her,
'Tis punishment enough sh'as giv'n her self
To one that is unconstant as her self,
And I with pity leave her to her choice
Ax
O the glad Sound! and will you quit this fondness,
And follow Honour, and hunt after Fame?
Ars
No, my Axalla, think not I can see
Her Beauties in my presence ravish'd from me,
And all the Sacred Store prophanely rifl'd
Ax
Then work your just Revenge, on him, on her,
On all—
Ars
Be hush'd, and dare not name Revenge;
The Name of Brother aws my rising Fury,
And for Nerina, she is yet so dear,
I'le suffer all things for her, quit my Honours,
My hopes of Scepters, and my right to Crowns,
Nay her dear self for her more certain ease
Ax
Strangely resolv'd!
Ars
Like Love undone by Fate,
Oh cou'd I tell where blear-ey'd Sorrow dwells,
Where bellowing out her Soul in discontent,
The empty Walls reverberate her woe
To some such place, Axalla, let us fly;
There will I on some cold hard Stone lay down
My mournful Head, while from my furrow'd Cheeks
My frequent Tears promiscuously fall;
One day I will bewail my own misfortunes,
Another will I kindly dedicate
To the lov'd Memory of Nerina 's Father
Whole Months and Years in tedious sorrow pass,
For my Nerina, that false, much-lov'd Maid,
Complain of all my angry Foes above,
With mournful sighs the hollow Ecchoes move,
And the last Groans of a departing Love
To Heav'n these only Vows, these Pray'rs I'le make,
Nerina may her fatal Choice forsake,
And from her bosom cast the lurking Snake
[Exeunt
ACT IV
A Councel-Table
Enter Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla, with other Lords and Attendants
Tam
'TIs time to look about me, I have slept
Too long, lull'd into visionary Dreams
Of fleeting pleasures, which I waking, find
Most dangerous, and for a seeming Son
My Bosom has receiv'd the worst of Foes
Arsines fled? and Conference with Turkey?
O Viper, Parricide, but say, my Friends
What timely Fortune has his Crimes reveal'd
Abd
Ev'n that which ruines all Conspiracies,
A squeamish Conscience, and a light Reward
The Ministers he hir'd to his Designs
Stand Witnesses against him
Tam
Bring 'em forth
Exit Odmar, and re-enters with two Slaves
Odm
Now act the Villains home, now is your time
[Aside to Slaves
Tam
Friends to our Crown, for Friends you seem to be,
Whose care has been employ'd to serve our State
From those apparent Dangers threatned it
We charge you in our Holy Prophets Name
Lay forth the Traytors Heart before our Eyes
Odm
Swear on the Alcoran your Accusations
Are just and true—Oh the unhappy Prince
Abd
S'heart, well play'd Fox, he seems to hear with grief
What he suborns false Witnesses to swear
[Aside
1. Slave
By all the Orders of Tartarian Pow'rs
Bound by Allegiance to our Sovereign,
We here are present to accuse and swear
Arsanes guilty of these Articles
No more than which himself did testifie,
And gave us in Commission to perform
First that this Prince holds private Conference
With the surviving Race of Bajaset
That with the fair Asteria 's Love enflam'd,
He seeks his Rival Brothers hated Life;
Then with Axalla that he doth combine,
To Poison Tamerlane our Royal Master,
And with Asteria to usurp his Throne
Tam
Treach'ry unheard beyond the Thought of Man!
But tell me, Friend, where bides the Traytor?
Odm
Speak,
Say any where
[Aside to the Slave
Sl
n a lone Wood, my Lord,
After a long Complaint against the Prince ▪
His Royal Brother; full of envious hate
And proud disdain; after he had rehears'd
All his pretended wrongs in Banishment
Receiv'd; blushing Scarlet deep with Shame,
He rose to an Arraignment of the State,
And our establish'd Laws—
Then impiously against his Father rag'd,
And swore Revenge
Abd
Methinks now Stratagem
Comes on to something
[Aside
Odm
These are practis'd Villains
2. Sl
Himself he said was streight for Prusia bound,
Where the young Rebel Princes wait his coming
Tam
Perdition on the Viper! how he bites!
Could e're such baseness spring from Tamerlane
Is this his Piety so far renown'd?
That Loyalty which seem'd inviolable?
Those Oaths that cou'd have forc'd all Heav'n believe him?
Is this his scorn of Honours and Rewards?
And did he starve his hungry Appetite,
That with a stronger Fury he might run
Wolf-like upon our Life and Diadem?
And gaping, swallow all the Golden Prey
Fly, fly, Arsanes, breath on what Soil thou wilt
Thy hated Life, though every Sea shou'd joyn
In one vast Ocean, their assistant Floods
To part us ever, though thy adverse Feet
In unknown Tracks kick at our upper Earth,
Though o're the Starry Pole thou soaring fly'st
Above old Winter, and deep Beds of Snow,
Our painted Vengeance shall pursue thy Soul,
And spy thee in thy darkest Caverns hid,
Pierce through thy Mansion with our sharp Revenge,
Or send our Curses, where we cannot reach
[Exit
Odm
See there, Arsanes, how the rowling Waves
Come on amain, and dash thee on the Rock
Abd
Methinks we two now like the Sea-born Giants,
Great Otus, and tall Ephaltes stand,
And grow out all their Acres in a moment
Odm
Our Fortunes Friend in this vast Enterprise
Have made us free to give the Scythian Throne
To whom we please; Come, Mandricard, and claim
Thy vast Possessions, ask us Heav'n next,
And we'l do more with these two Fertile Brains,
Then e're Briareus with his hundred Hands
[Exeunt
Asteria's Apartment
Who is discover'd lying on a Couch, a Cupid in Soft Musick descends over her and Sings
Song
HOw pleasant Vertue are thy Slumbers,
Sound thy Sleeps, and sweet thy Dreams,
While thee no Fear, no Guilt incumbers,
Danger frights, or Thought condemns?
2
Thou naked with resistless Armour
Dost thy self revenge, and shield,
Thou silent art so sweet a Charmer,
To thy Reasons all must yield
3
On thy fair Brow sits smiling Honour,
Iustice waits thy awful Voice,
Thou Heir to Blessings art, thou Owner
Of Rich Fortunes Richest Ioys
4
Thou, what is Heav'ns greatest Blessing,
Art the Darling Child of Love,
Though Heav'n yet hinder from possessing,
It will all thy Pains remove
[The Cupid ascends
Asteria awakes in great disorder
Ast
What Mystick Objects entertain my Soul,
And hold me in amazement? how confus'd
Are all my Thoughts, kind Joys with Troubles mixt,
Hope with dread Fear, disorder'd mass of Fancy!
The End seem'd good, but oh that End is vain,
As fleeting as its Shade, as womanish
And fond a Dream, as to my weary'd Eyes
Thought cou'd suggest, or Mimick Fancy play
Is going out. Enter Mandricard staying her
Man
So on fair Paphos Isle the wanton Queen
Her Shelly Chariot drawn with sporting Doves,
Had lightly enter'd in a smiling Calm,
Ready to cruise upon her Parent Seas,
When from a-far the Warlike God espy'd her,
And brought her back to more substantial Pleasures
Ast
What means this fatal Comet to our House,
Near what new birth of mischief does he shine?
Man
At length my Pray'rs are heard, my Vows have reach'd
The Deity, to which they were address'd
Accept, O Fairest Pow'r, from a Prince,
The Faithful Sacrifice of Humblest Thanks,
For all the Blessings you have pour'd upon him
Ast
What Blessings, or what Prince? yet shou'd there be
Any my tenderness has gratifi'd,
He's chose an ill Ambassador I'm sure
To pay his just Acknowledgments, which needs
Must taste ungrateful from the Man I hate
Man
Heav'n, how discordant are her Hand and Tongue!
Think not, Asteria, Mandricard cou'd trust
To any Second his most Bosom Secret,
I the Receiver-kneel to pay the Debt
Ast
If you from me a Kindness did receive,
I'm sure 'twas small, and may be paid with ease
Man
How unconcern'd she speaks, and looks disdain!
Yes, Madam, Heart for Heart is easie change;
Flames will meet Flames, and Fires joyn with Fires,
Ravage through all, and leave no middle space
Ast
Rav'st thou, or do my Ears drink in a Sound
As real, as 'tis monstrous? Oh my Stars,
Protect me, and remove the hateful Object
Man
Yet Princess, your fair Hand has otherwise
Decipher'd me—the Glorious Mandricard—
Ast
My Hand!
Man
Your Hand, which on the happy Paper prest
The Praises of your much lov'd Mandricard
Ast
Curst be that Hand that writes thee ought but Fiend,
Curst be that Tongue that speaks thee ought but Monster
Man
Unfold, Great Alha, this Mysterious Secret!
Come, you dissemble, and a modest shame
Defers our Joys
Ast
I'de clasp a Serpent sooner;
Had my base Hand e're thus bely'd my Heart,
As an infectious Limb I'de tear it from
My tainted Body, for the Wild Beasts, or Flames
Man
You need not now, Asteria, use such Language,
There are no Oaths, no Promises, no Vows
To be kept now: Sure Death has swallow'd all,
And cold Arsanes in their ruine lies
Ast
Yes, I will keep 'em still to punish thee,
My Faith shall be the Scourge of my Revenge,
My Constancy shall keep thee on a Rack
Of Everlasting Torments, and my Oaths
Shall one by one strike thee with mad despair;
Thou art my Slave, and thou shalt live like one
Thinkest thou, fond Fomenter of my Grief,
I do not hate that Man to Death, nay Hell,
That caus'd Arsanes Ruine? Proud Prince, I do;
Remember, Sir, my Brothers, Fathers Wrongs,
And blush to ask a Grace of me; to love?
No not to look, or visit me with Monsters
Man
You treat me, Fair one, so severe a way,
As forces me to plead in my defence
If in the War your Brother fell, not I,
But Fortune guiding my far-wandring Steel,
Cut off the forward Youth—
For your Great Fathers, and Arsanes Wrongs,
I'm innocent as harmless Infants are
Ast
You innocent! so's Hell; so is your Train
Of Fellow-Villains, Infernal Ministers,
Are they not Prince?
Man
What e're you'l have 'em be
They are, they must; and which of 'em but dares
Offer to plead his Innocence, he dies
Ast
Fine Flatterer! thus did that supple Tongue
Sooth Tamerlane to hate the best of Princes
Nor have you ended there, but cherish still
Your Breast with thinking with what subtle Art
You spread your Snares to catch the Prey design'd,
And glory in the Murderous Success
Man
How sweet her Looks, yet dreadful to approach!
Madam, a Prince repentant begs your Pardon,
And as the Fury of the Scythian Sword
Is now asswag'd, untaught to hurt or kill,
So let your Anger be allay'd with mildness;
So will the World in peaceful Triumph sit,
And smilling, pall the envious Fates designs
To them Ispatia
Ha! whence that Hellish Fury like her self
Has brought her here? Curse on the twining Serpent!
Shall I ne'r shake her off! by Heav'n it comes!
A swift Contrivance whets my sudden Thought,
Which shall divide us ever, far as Heav'n,
Or far as Hell their Center hold from Earth
[Exit
Isp
Art thou the watry Sourse from whence this Stream,
These daily gushings of my Mourning Eyes
Burst forth, and almost drown my fainting Heart?
Are those the Comets, whose dire Influence
Sheds Ruine on me; is there in that Voice
So sweet an Harmony, so full of Charms,
It can bewitch the Sense of Mandricard?
Ast
Yes, Mandricard has learnt to stoop to me,
And at my Feet his daily Homage pay,
Which thus I scorn, and spurn ev'n into Wind
Isp
Unsufferable Creature, does she scorn him?
Oh more, far more than this, I cou'd endure
Her Love; contemn him? nay that is not all,
She Rivals me, and yet professes scorn;
Is't not enough you have ensnar'd his Love?
Caught with a Golden Bait his yielding Heart?
But you must on his Honour raise contempt,
And make him cheap—Oh Torture, Oh my Soul!
Ast
Know then, Ispatia, if you are resolv'd
To sound my Heart, I frankly must confess
I hate him, hate my Brothers Murderer
To death, and pray the Gods he may so love,
So burn with Passion, till I pity him,
Which Furies first shall do unto the Damn'd
Nay do not rage, but thank me that I hate him,
For had I lov'd, Ispatia, had I lov'd,
You might have found him lock'd within my Arms,
Not prostrate at my Feet, nor had you e're
Have been admitted to reprove me for it,
As now you do
Isp
'Tis like I shou'd not, Captive,
Nor am I now perhaps, by your good leave;
Yet I'le maintain the happiness I've sought,
Stay here and pierce through either Heart, as far
As Sharp ey'd Jealousie can look
Ast
Compleat
With this one Promise then my Happiness,
To hold him ever after from my sight
But see, he comes—
[Enter Mandricard with a Priest
Isp
A Priest! what Omens now
Swell big that holy Harbinger of Fate?
Man
This holy Man, Ispatia, as of old
He joyn'd our Hands before the smiling Gods,
So wou'd he now our Hearts; one Kiss upon
The Sacred Alcoran, and our Love is Seal'd
Isp
Blest Alteration!
Ast
O thrice happy Hour!
Isp
What sudden Ague seizes my chill'd Limbs?
How my Eyes dazle, and my Senses swim!
What have we done, my Lord?
Man
O nothing, nothing,
'Tis but a Fit, a Qualm, a certain Scout,
Or flying Messenger from Deaths Tribunal,
To summon thee to Everlasting Rest
Isp
What means my Lord?
Man
Oh 'tis a Sovereign Balm,
A Cure to all Distempers—to be plain,
The Book was poison'd, and thou hast drunk the Venom
Isp
O Traytor! yet e're I expire, hear me
Man
Speak quickly then
Isp
Not long ago, my Lord, you did receive
A Letter from that Princess
Ast
Me!
Isp
With all
The Pow'r of Penitence I here implore
Your Pardon
Man
What means the Fury?
Isp
In her Name
You took, embrac'd it, lock'd within your Bosom
The outward Manuscript, within your Heart
The sweet Contents
Man
Which do enrich my Soul!
Isp
But now, ungrateful Man, be't spoke at last
To fright thy Lawless Passion be it spoke;
I, not Asteria, wrote those Fatal Words
Which cause my Death
Man
Then wou'd to Mahomet
They may prove thy Damnation too
Ast
Oh Heav'n!
Isp
Well, Traytor, thou hast had thy Fatal Wish,
As it is sure I die; but know base Poisoner,
Thy wily Treasons have not set thee free,
Nor will Ispatia leave thee even in Death,
I'le fright thee in thy Dreams, I'le haunt thee waking,
I'le scourge thy Conscience with Whips of Remorse
The Sting of Serpents shall be nothing to it
Yes, I will have Revenge, I will; I'le strike
Thee mad with terror, when thou dar'st approach
My Rivals Beauties; Clasp her, and I'le glide
All Cold between, and dash the fancy'd Joy
O Alha, Mahomet, O Courteous Heav'n,
Give me but Power as here I yield my Soul
Up to your Mercy in Deaths cruel Pangs
[Dies
Man
Remove the hated Body from my sight
Ast
And are there Pow'rs in Heav'n, and can they see
This Sacrilegious Mischief go unpunish'd?
Man
What ever Deities in Heav'n there are,
They prove the Deed, and smile upon the Doer
And thus by giving thee reward it; now Priest
[ Mandricard and the Priest take her up, and are carrying her off
Ast
Look down, O Mahomet, from Heav'n, behold
My hard distressed Fortune; save, oh save
A Virgins Chastity, unsoil'd, unstain'd,
And right with Miracles thy Pow'r contemn'd
Enter Axalla and Zanches, their Swords drawn
Ax
This way, this way the mournful Ecchoe calls
Oh the bold Traytors, Sacrilegious Villains
[They fight, Mandricard and the Priest are beaten off
They run, they fly; now injur'd Vertue, seek
[ To Ast
Thy safe Retreat, while I pursue the Villains
[Exeunt
Ast
Who e're you be just Mahomet reward you
[Exit
SCENE a Wood
Arsanes sitting melancholly on a Green Bank, while his Page sings this SONG
BEhold ye Sylvans that frequent
This silent, sighing, mourning Grove;
Behold the Fountains, Birds lament,
Vnhappy Damons fatal Love
Chloris to him her Heart denies,
For which the gentle Shepherd dies
Ch. Chloris to him and c
Bright Chloris fairest of her kind,
That charm'd with Smiles the yielding Swain,
False Chloris falser than the Wind,
That turns his Fairy Ioys to Pain
Her Vows, her Oaths which tir'd Heav'n,
Were for so many Curses giv'n
Ch. Her Vows, her Oaths and c
Then fill with hollow Sighs the Day,
With Cypress strow the mourning Green;
Let nothing fresh, let nothing gay
O're all the fading Plain be seen;
• or see the Swain lies bleeding there,
Wounded by Love, dead with Despair
Ch. For see the Swain and c
Ars
Thus in a Chaos of cold discontent
I pass the weary Minutes, breathing forth
My daily Passions from my wasted Spirits;
Unhappy, wretched Prince, how Destiny
Allots unjust misfortunes to thy Youth!
Which to others is a flowing Spring of good,
To thee's a frosty Winter of cold Sorrow
Oh my Nerina! how thy doubtful Faith
Strikes deep my Heart; nor can I think thee false
To thy false Hand against thy Vertue plead
So, thus—I may gaze here till I am blind,
[Looking on the Letter
But never here shall satisfaction find
[Throwing it away
Enter in hast Axalla and Zanches
Ax
Live, live Arsanes
In just Obedience to your great Commands
I went to the Apartment of Asteria;
Where first I heard what seiz'd my Soul with horror,
And num'd my Senses with a Marble Fear;
I heard, Arsanes, your Nerina shrieking,
With all the Struglings of a Ravish'd Maid
When from her Chamber rush'd in furious hast
The Villain Mandricard, and the prophaner
Villain a Priest, who grasp'd the Sacred Store
Rais'd by the Pow'r of so just an Anger,
Your Old Mans Blood glow'd with a Youthful Heat,
While with our Swords I and the Faithful Zanches
Pursu'd the Traytors, forc'd 'em quit their Treasure,
And made 'em thankful to their Stars for Life
Ars
O Golden Minute! Thanks O Gracious Heav'n!
And thou its kindest happiest Instrument
Ax
What Past before her fair Hand will unfold,
This Letter to your Hand she charg'd me bring
Ars
They'r welcome on what ever Errand sent,
Axalla, see the wond'rous mighty Proof
[Reading
Of her wrong'd Innocence, she writes, not she,
But fond Ispatia, as dying she confess'd,
Was Author of those Lines which drove us hither
In so much Fury, and so much Despair
Ax
'Tis as Axalla 's Heart cou'd wish it shou'd be
Ars
How cou'd I trust these Characters which are
Unlike, as Faith and Falshood, Love and Hate,
Hope and Despair; and shou'd I then have curst,
Curst her sweet Vertue for anothers Crime?
Such words wou'd sure have blasted me, such words
Had gave my Heart the lie, had swoln my Tongue
With its own Venome, nay had press'd and grip'd
My thoughtful Sense with wrecks of dire remorse,
And the black Scourge of self-tormenting Conscience
Ax
But see, my Lord, the tenderest words she writes!
See at the end of her Complaints her Pray'rs,
She begs Protection from your Royal Hands
Ars
Protect her! yes, against the Universe,
Brother, and Father; Fortunes Darts, and Fates
Decrees, the business of our Watchful Eyes
Shall be to mark her Enemies, our Strength
And well-collected Vertue be her Guard
Where e're she moves: Let us not wast in words
One moment of our Life, these happy Hours,
A swift Obedience calls our Hearts and Hands,
For from Nerina came the soft Commands
[Exeunt
ACT V
Arsanes, Asteria
Ars
WIth equal Joy, as when the first-born Man
Through a sweet Paradise led his Infant Bride,
With all the Pleasures of a welcome Love
Do I unsatiate with Asteria 's Charms
Pass the glad day
Ast
Did not my Fathers Fate
Oppose the sweet delights of growing Love,
This day I cou'd with mighty Queens dispute
The Number of bless'd Minutes
Ars
Oh my Soul
Ast
My Heart, I can profus'dly wish!
Ars
My all that I can ask, and Heav'n can give
Enter Abdalla, with Guards
Abd
Or I'm mistaken, or
This is the Traytor, apprehend him
Ars
Whom?
Abd
Arsanes, Sir, me thinks you much resemble
That great, out-witted States-man Prince
Ars
'Tis he; Slave, speak thy Errand
Abd
From Tamerlane
Ars
No more; 'tis Blasphemy
To ask, or to dispute the Cause, I go
Where e're he calls to shameful Bands, or Death
Lead on—but oh, my Heart, forget her not
Asteria —
Ast
My Lord—
Abd
We must not wait
Fond Lovers tedious partings; Lead away
Ars
Farewel, Fair Star, for ever
[Is led off
Ast
He's gone, he's gone;
Hurry'd away by Traytors to his Death,
And oh, ye Pow'rs, I had not power to speak
My last Farewel; Ile follow though, and pierce
Without regard of Life or Being, through
All that does, can oppose me; break through Fire,
Through Flames, o're Mountains pass, and swelling Seas,
Through Files of Tartars, Swords, Lances, Javelins
Arm'd with resistless Love, and Rage, I'le fly
Like Lightning in a moment to his Cell,
With all the force of parting Love embrace him
Bath with my Widow-Tears his panting Breast,
Bask in his Eyes, share that Eternal Rest
His Noble Soul shall claim among the Blest
Exit
Mandricard is discovered asleep, the Ghost of Ispatia by him with a Dagger in her Hand, threatning him
Gh
Rest, rest, my Soul, at last great Heav'ns Care,
Let never Innocence of Heav'n despair
Thus sent, thus arm'd, an injur'd Shade I come
To scourge thee, Prince, for thy untimely Doom
Thy Conscience thus just Alha does unseal,
And to thee all the horrors of thy Crimes reveal
With Frenzy shalt thou rage, with Sorrow groan,
And in deep thought thy dazled Senses drown
An inward Hell thee, Poisoner, shall burn ▪
Nor shalt thou ever to thy self return
Exit
Mandricard rises frighted and raging
Man
I wou'd have torn her, and have sacrific'd
Her Members to Ispatia 's wandring Ghost;
Nay haunt me not, dear Shade, I've sworn to do it,
With as much Art I'le work thy Rivals Fate,
As th' wiliest Devil of 'em all can wish
What Sorcery this Turkish Beauty bears!
Ha! where so swiftly fled! have Harlots Wings?
Then to the Icarian Flood I'le steer my Course,
Drain it, and rob the unexperienc'd Boy
Of his ill-manag'd Quills, born on whose Force
I'le mount, and catch her in her hottest Chace
Enter Odmar, Abdalla
Odm
My Lord, Lord Mandricard
Man
Did not you see a Monster up the Hill
Sharp radiant Arrows arm'd her Magick Eyes,
Her Face, or no Face, or her double Face,
Shew'd crooked, Nature shrowded by false Art,
These well-known marks make ill for her escape
Hey follow, seek, 'tis worth our pains, and more,
Millions to one but we shall seize the Witch
See ho! see there o're yonder Plain she fleets!
O for an Arrow from Diana 's Quiver!
Spread wide your Nets, mark where to Autumn Gray
The verdant Spring is chang'd, that, that's her Road,
Made hoary by her Sorcery and Charms
She's near, she's near; my Nostrils draw the Scent
Of Paints, of Powders, Daubings, strong Perfumes,
A Whore will scent a Mile—so nimble—ha,
'Tis noble Sport, so hei, follow, so hei
[Runs up and down, and out
Odm
Was ever such a Change in Nature wrought!
So sudden, yet so perfect!
Abd
This your Plots,
Your Stratagems have done, had I been heard,
He had e're this have worn a Crown by Arms
Nobly atchiev'd
Odm
Thine were the means to sure
Destruction, this we may amend
Abd
Ha, ha!
Dost thou not see our hopes in frenzy drown'd?
Brave had you fell my way, as shameful this
Odm
We'l follow him—
Abd
In vain
Odm
Our Counsels may—
Abd
Make him a Fool, as they have made him mad
Odm
What shall I do?
Abd
Die in the Act like Men
Odm
Or live, and work more Ruine
Abd
And be found
Traytors at last, most infamous and base
A Noise of Fighting
Odm
What Noise is that?
Abd
'Tis the dear Shout of Battle,
Abdalla, to thy lov'd Vocation
[Exit
Odm
Go,
I'le follow, and thy dangerous Fortunes share
[Exit
The Scene opening, discovers Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla, encoun tring Axalla, Zanches, and others
Ax
Arsanes, live; or perish all thy Friends
Peo
Revenge, Revenge our Prince Arsanes wrongs
Ax
They fly, they fly; see, O the wrong'd Arsanes,
Thy Succour nigh
[ Tam. and his Party give back ▪
Abd
We must not thus give up
To Slaves our Lawrels while Abdalla lives
Ax
Die then perfidious, base, eternal Villain!
[Kills Abdalla
A Retreat is sounded on Tamerlanes side, the Scene closes
Enter Tamerlane, Odmar
Tam
Dead or alive he will my Ruine prove
Odm
Dispatch him strait
Tam
You'r rash, and unadvis'd;
Prove thy self worthy of the Name thou bear'st
Our Counsellor, or die
Odm
Your Slaves Advice
Meets your Commands; let, Sir, Arsanes live;
Free him
Tam
Ha! say'st thou!
Odm
These Reports will quell
Th' incensed Crowd; while I in Ambush laid
In some dark secret Corner of the Palace,
Rush on him swell'd with pride, and reeling with
The drunkenness of Love, end him, my Lord,
Big with large expectations of delight,
And from your Royal Scepter take the Guilt
Tam
Thou art my Soul, my Empires Prop, and Refuge,
Who hast reviv'd it sinking from its Ashes;
Next to our own, when thy Blest Hand performs
The happy Work of thy projecting Brain,
I'le Crown thy Head with Lawrel and with Gold,
Boasting of thee our Life and Throne to hold
[Exit
Odm
Now Odmar, for thy share expect no less
Than Scepters for thy dear contriving Wit;
Ha, ha, ha, ha, to see the Shallow King
Expect Security and Bliss from me
Vain Fools who think we work for any Ends
But for our own—How tamely the dull Crowd
Lay down their Arms, and leave their Prince defenceless;
Die, die, Arsanes, and live Mandricard,
And I thy happy Father; with what ease
Odmar a Crown has purchas'd to his Race!
Me thinks I see my numerous Royal Offspring
Steal softly by, all Crown'd; no more, let others
By Blood and Civil Wars an Empire gain
Tis Fraud alone false Titles can maintain
[Exit
A Chamber
Enter Arsanes
Ars
I wonder how the Grave and Wise define
Th' uncertain motions of ambiguous Chance,
While equally she flatters, and destroys
'Tis true I'm free, live, have large promises
To Love and Reign, as my high Birth requires
But oh, what safety's in that Freedom found
From the sweet quiet of the Mind exil'd!
That I in Chains!
[Enter Axalla
Ax
My Lord!
Ars
What hast my Friend,
To view this Load of Shame?
Ax
Ha, Prince
Ars
I said my Shame
Am I not mark'd in every Limb a Villain?
Ax
This Temper suits not with your Fate, my Lord,
Thick Crowds of Friends expect you at the Court,
Waiting to Crown your vast Desert with Honour
Which Tamerlane by me commands you take
Ars
What sort of Honour is to Rebels due?
Ax
Rebells?
Ars
Am I not one? how came I here?
Ax
Leave those jealous Thoughts
Rank'd in long Rows the gazing People stand
An endless Multitude; while smiling Virgins
From Windows, mixt with Joyful Matrons, lean,
All hoping, and all wishing, praying too
For your Approach; Arsanes is the Sound,
The only Sound the Gods can hear from Earth
Ars
Triumphant Villain that I am!
Ax
Ha! Villain!
Fool that I am to court a dreaming Zealot
To sublime Honours; stupid, thankless Prince;
Is this the Character our love deserves?
Traytors and Villains! Oh the hateful Name!
Go, Prince, and as thy unman'd Soul requires,
Neglecting Palaces, in Dungeons dye,
Slave-marking Iron press with vilest pain
Those Limbs, which Sword, Steel, Fire have sustain'd
Farewell, Arsanes, neither Prince, nor Man
Ars
Hold, Noble Friend; pard'n, oh Axalla, pard'n
A few rash words; the Act in you was good,
Friendlike, and Just; and were it not forbid,
Forbid by Duty, it were so in me;
But oh!
Ax
Still dreaming?
Ars
Oh my Innocence
Thou sacred fort, fair Guardian of my Breast,
Where art thou fled? me thinks I'm left alone,
Disarm'd, defenceless, since I saw thee last
Ax
Still in the tedious maze of fearful doubts!
Ars
Where e're I turn I see my Ruine nigh
Ax
Mark then your surest way to Life or Death,
Bright Honour, or base Shame; the King, Arsanes,
Brooks heavily the scorn of his Commands,
Your Friends their ill accepted Love repent,
And sad Nerina all in Tears protests
She never thought Arsanes cou'd deny
Her any thing
Ars
Hold, thou hast said enough;
Words of such wond'rous sense, so moving, full
With Arguments of such prevailing Pow'r,
Wou'd raise the dull Lethargick from his Dream;
That Threefold Chain of Duty, Friendship, Love,
Wou'd bind the Roving Sylvan Honours Slave;
Faith draws the Wills of Men to my defence,
Duty and Love Auxiliary Gods
[Exeunt
Odmar solus
Odm
Traytor! 'tis a Name of vast import!
Not arm'd with furbish'd Brass, nor lock'd in Steel,
He bears the noiseless Weapons of Deceit
Lies politick, and subtle Flatteries
Raise him to trust; what cannot Villains trusted?
We change, destroy, make Princes, and unmake
Unenvy'd be henceforth Cassander fam'd,
Dire Sylla, Close Sejanus, Cruel Marius,
Seditious Gracchi, God-like Catiline,
With all the Glorious Traytors of each Age;
Not the false Smerdis with his Magick Train
Could sound the dark Abyss of Odmars Plots
Peop
Long live Great Tamerlane, and Prince Arsanes
[Shout within
Odm
Hark, now me thinks I see this Lover come
Hot with desire; see how the too rash Fool
With what large hasty steps he meets half way
My Daggers Point; now, Heart, for thy Revenge!
Heav'n guide my Hand where I resolve to strike!
Here will I make my Vigilant Retreat,
All Passages but through this Gate are bar'd
To the dear Lodgings of his lov'd Asteria;
While the dark Night shall shrow'd me and my Guilt
[Retreats
Enter Mandricard
Man
No not so much as one poor Cypress Torch
To light her to her Grave—ah the much-wrong'd Ispatia!
[ Odmar rushes on him and stabs him with a Poniard
Odm
As sure a Thrust as ever Malice made
Lye there thou empty Blaze of Fame; while I
Run with false Tears, devulger of thy Fate
Oh how the Crowd will fret! the Prince Arsanes,
The Noble Prince lies murder'd in the way
Help, help, the Prince is murder'd. oh, oh, oh, oh
[Exit
Man
Darkness and Horror! whither am I going?
What greedy Horse-leech sucks my Vital Blood,
And draws me to a Being like Ispatia 's?
Laugh, laugh, ye Furies, and ye Devils grin,
Scourge me with Scorpions, punish me with Flames,
Eternal Flames; tear, consume, devour me,
Let Hell surround me with her greatest Torments,
Severest Plagues prepar'd for blackest Souls;
But turn the wrong'd Ispatia from my sight,
Ispatia 's Presence is a Thousand Hells
[Dies
Re enter Odmar with a dark Lanthorn
Odm
But to be sure thou'rt dead, it much concerns
By Heav'n 'tis Mandricard, Death, Furies, Hell,
And thou, curst Hand, false Author of my woe,
Thou Traytor to my Will, and Rebel to my Aim;
Oh the black Curse of Chance—
And plague of Accidents! so gross an Error
Was wrought sure by the envy of the Stars
My Mandricard, my Son, oh, oh, my Son
Enter Tamerlane
Tam
Keep back the Rabble, and your selves retreat,
While I survey and mourn my hapless Son
Well, Friend, thou'st done the business
Odm
Very well,
To make the Strumpet Fortune frisk and laugh
Tam
What mean you Friend?
Odm
I mean there is in Heav'n
A Jubilee among Arsanes Stars
Tam
That he's come there—
Odm
That he is not come there
Tam
Thy Mystick Speech I cannot comprehend,
Nor sound thy Sense, no nor thy Ghastly Looks
Odm
This will explain 'em all—
[Points to Mandric
Tam
By all the Gods
'Tis Mandricard, Curst Villain—Oh my Son
Odm
Ha, ha, ha
Tam
What wou'd thy Mirth?
Odm
Seeing once a Corse
On a Black Beer to gloomy Pluto born
• laught to see the Sympathetick Crowd
Howl, yell, lament, as they were Parents all
What was the Corse to them, or they to it?
Tam
Yet Ridling, Slave? what hoa my Guards—who waits?
Seize there the Murderer
[Enter Guards
Odm
I scorn to perish by a Fate so base
Thus do the Noble dye—
[Stabs himself
What mean those Tears?
[ To Tam
Know, King, thou shou'dst have shed those very Tears
Some twenty years ago, when Mandricard
Your Son, my Charge, a tender Infant dy'd;
Then the wish'd Glory of my days began;
He dey'd; I to his room my Son advanc'd,
My own Themyre, suppos'd your Mandricard
My swell'd Ambition yet did higher aim,
A King, at least the Father of a King
I was resolv'd to raise my self. Think, Sir,
By me how oft Arsanes has been made
By me a Traytor, never of himself
This was the last unlucky Cheat I acted,
Which the curst Fates had otherwise decreed,
And turn'd on me the Ruines of my Wish
Scarce can I more; my Death comes swiftly on;
While from my Actions I this Glory draw,
None cou'd but Odmar, Odmars Plots destroy
[Dies
Tam
Remove the wretched Bodies from my sight,
The hated Traytor, and the curst Impostor!
First let 'em hang a publick Spectacle
In our high Road which to the Palace leads,
Then when all Eyes are glutted with the sight,
Cast 'em to Birds and Beasts a welcome Prey
Enter an Officer
Off
Prepare, Great Tamerlane, for your defence,
Uproars and Tumults every where are ris'n
Fame of Arsanes Death has arm'd the Crowd,
With Fury, Rage, Suspicions, Frenzies, Fears,
Your self the sole Promoter of his Fate
Are sworn, arraign'd, on you they vow Revenge
Tam
Hast quickly, and with Trumpets Sound pronounce
The Rumour false; their lov'd Arsanes lives;
By blest mistake 'tis Mandricard is fal'n
[Exit off
Call to my Arms the Noble Prince Arsanes,
And his fair Mistress; at last my Eyes are open,
Unseal'd to Truth, I see and am confirm'd
No close Conspiracy, or black Design,
But Love, and only Love, their Hearts did joyn
Enter Arsanes and Asteria
Tam
Thanks, O Propitious Heav'n, thanks my Stars,
And all ye Angels Guards of Innocence,
Which have restor'd, and brought into his Right
The wrong'd Arsanes, welcome O my Son,
Thy Enemies are dead, the Impostors dead,
And with them all Suspitions of thy Faith,
Thy Injuries are dead—Oh my Arsanes,
A Father in the Face of Heav'n salutes thee
A happy Bridegroom, from a Fathers Hand,
Receive thy Fairer Vertues, Fair Reward
Ars
O Extasie! Oh Paradise of Joy!
I come scarce hoping for a Pard'n, and find
A full Reward, Inestimable Treasure,
Eternal Bliss; nor is it Fairy Treasure!
No, no, I have it here, I hold it, grasp it,
A Real Pleasure, and Substantial Good
But oh let not the fulness of my Joy
Make me unmindful of the Noble Giver
Oh, my Asteria—
Ast
My Lord!
Ars
Thus let us kneel,
With Thanks unto our Father
Ast
Our Preserver!
Ars
Our new Creator, thus let us lie prostrate,
And wonder at our sudden Happines
Tam
Rise and believe it granted; now witness Heav'n,
And ye kind Stars, that smile upon our Throne,
With what untroubled Joy I joyn the Hands
Of the blest Loyal Pair
The Sacred Tye just Alha shall confirm,
And as we Sign, Seal your Eternal Loves
Ars
Thanks O our Royal Father, God-like Prince,
And double Author of my happy Being
So may Great Alha all your Actions Crown,
And with Eternal Blessings Guard your Throne
As I your worthy Praises loudly sing,
The Kindest Father, and the Justest King
[Exeunt
EPILOGUE, By Mr. DRYDEN
LAdies, the Beardless Author of this Day,
Commends to you the Fortune of his Play
A Woman Wit has often grac'd the Stage,
But he's the first Boy-Poet of our Age
Early as is the Year his Fancies blow,
Like young Narcissus peeping through the Snow;
Thus Cowley Blossom'd soon, yet Flourish'd long,
This is as forward, and may prove as strong
Youth with the Fair shou'd always Favour find,
Or we are damn'd Dissemblers of our kind
What's all this Love they put into our Parts?
'Tis but the pit-a-pat of Two Young Hearts
Shou'd Hag and Gray-Beard make such tender moan,
Faith you'd e'en trust 'em ▪ to themselves alone,
And cry let's go, here's nothing to be done
Since Love's our Business, as 'tis your Delight,
The Young, who best can practise, best can Write
What though he be not come to his full Pow'r,
He's mending and improving every hour
You sly She-Iockies of the Box and Pit,
Are pleas'd to find a hot unbroken Wit,
By management he may in time be made,
But there's no hopes of an old batter'd Iade;
Faint and unnerv'd he runs into a Sweat,
And always fails you at the Second Heat
FINIS
