Requested Title: THE HYPOCRITE
Authors: Thomas Shadwell
Matched Alias: The Hypocrite
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-works-of-of-tho-sha_shadwell-thomas_1693
Source Title: The works of of Tho. Shadwell, Esq; ... 1693
Source Author: Shadwell, Thomas.
Source Date: 1693
Source File: output/public_domain_stage2_texts/the-hypocrite_bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_the-works-of-of-tho-sha_shadwell-thomas_1693.txt
Notes: Curated salvage from validated Shadwell collected-works segment.

---
Prologue. 


Ow popmlar ave Poets now adays ? 
Who can more Men at their firſt ſunmons raiſe, | 
Than many 4 wealthy home-bred Gentleman, 
By all his intereſt in his Countrey can. | 
They raiſe their Friends, but in one day ariſe 
*Gainſt one poor Poet, all theſe Enemies: 
For ſo he has obſerv/d you always are, 
And ag in all that write maimtain a War. 
What ſhall he give you compoſition now? 
Alas, the knows not what you will allow. 
He has no cautionary Song, nor Dance, 
That might the Treaty of . bis Peace advances 
No kind Romantick Lovers in his Play, &% 
To figh and whine out paſſion, ſuch as may 
Charm waiting-women with FHeroick Chim, 
And ſtill reſolve to live and dy: in Rhime ; 
Such as your ears with Love, and Honour feaſt, 
And play at Crambo for three hours at leaſt « 
That Fight, and Woot, in Verſe in the ſame breath, 
And make Similttud:s, and Love in Death : 
=—Þ it if you love a Foel, he bid me ſay, 
Fe has great choice to ſhew yeu in his Play; 
( To do you ſervice ) I am one to day. 
Well Gallants, *tis his firſt, Faith, let it #0, 
Tuſt as old Gameſters by young Bubbles + : 
7 his firſt and ſmaller Stake let him but Tin, 
And for agreater Sum you ll draw,bim in, 
Or uſ: our Poet, as you would a Havre, 
Which when (he's hunted down, for Sport you ſpare. 
At length take up, and damn no more for ſhame, 
For if you only at the (Larrey aime, 
Thrs Critick poaching will d:ſtroy your Game, 


®. 4-4 1 — 


——_—_—_ 


DRAMATIS PERSONA, 


Moroſe Melancholy Man, tornfnred 
d beyond Meaſure with the Imperti- 


Stanford, == = of People, and refolved to leave the 


World to be quit of them. 


An Aiery young Gentleman, friend to Stax- 

ford, one that is pleaſed with, and laughs art 

Level, the Impertinents, and that which is the 0- 
thers torment, is his recreation. 


C A fooliſh Knight, that prerends to under- 
ſtand every thing in the World, and will ſuf- 
Sir Poſrive At-all sf 10 man to underſtand any thing in his 
ir Poſitive At-all,—- pam ſo fooliſhly Poſitive, that he 
will never be convinced of. an Error, though 

Lnever ſo grols. 


\ A conceited Poet, always troubling men 
| with impertinent Diſcourſes of Poctry, and 
| the repetition of his own Verſes; in all his 


Ninny, 5 Diſcourſe he uſes ſuch affeted Words , 
that 'tis as bad as the Canting of a Gyp- 
ihe. 


[ A Familiar loving Coxcomb, that em- 

braces and kiſſes all men : So ulcd to his Fa- 

Woodcock pon mjljar endearing expreſſions,that he cannot 
_forbcar them in the midſt of his Anger. 


\ An impudent Cowardly Hefor that tor- 
Huffe, _ ments Stanford with coming to borrow Mo- 
{ney, and is beaten by him. 


= St anfords Man. 
B Fate 


Roger -- 


>= wp — , _ - 


=— > 


Father ,——— To Emi and Crolins. 


þ A Grave ill-bred Coxcomb, that never 
{pcaks without a Proverb. 


Country Gent - 


yr ; {Two Juſtices Clarks. 
Emilia, Of the ſame Humour with Stanford. 
Carolina, Of the ſame Humour with Lovel. 
A Whore, that takes upon her the name 
an ——— 
ing to Vircue and Honour, 
Lat! — Pmilia's Maid. 
Brideet,- Lady Yaines Maid. 


Seargeant with a File of Muſqeeteers, 
Waiters, Fidlers, &c. 


The place of the SCEN E, 
EEND ON 


The Time. 
In the Month of March, 166; 


- 6 
4 «#1 


Ma 


THE 


Sallen Lovers : 
Or, The 


IMPERTINENTS. 


ACT I 


Enter Stanford and Roger his Max. 


To be tormented thus where e*re I go? 
What an lmpertinent Age is this we live in, 
Whenall the World is grown fo troubleſom, 
That I ſhould envy him that fpends his days 
In ſome remote and Mp Place, 
With none but Bears and Wolves for his Companions, 
And never ſees the folly of Mankind ! 
Rog. Good Sir be patient, let i not diſturb you. 
Stanford. Patient —_— 
Thou may'ſt as well teach patience to a man 
That has a fit oth* Collick or the Stone. 


T what Unlucky Minute was I born, 


Love. What ina fit agen Stanford? now art C Enter Lovel, 
Thou as moody as a Poet after his Play is damn'd, 
Stanf. Oh Love! ) Exit Roger. 


I am tormented ſo beyond my patience 

I am reſolved to quit the World, and find 
Some uninhabited place far from Converle. 
Where 1 may live as fcee as Nature made me. 


B 2 Loz: 


. The Sullen Lovers; Or, 


Lov. Why this down-right Madneſs, 
Pcethee lend for a Chirurgeon and open a Vein, 
Try what that will do, for thou wilt be as 
Ripe for Bedlam elſe as a Fanatick, 
Stanf, What would you have me do ? 
Where e*ce I turn me 1 am baired ſtill 
By ſome importanate Fools that uſe me worſe, 
Then Boys do Cocks upon Shrove- Tueſday ; 
This makes wy Lite ſo tedious and unpleaſant, 
That rather than endure it longer Ple find out 
Some place in the Weft-Indies, where I may 
See a Man no oftener than a Blazing-Star. 
Lov. Why, thou wilt come to be bound in thy Bed, S1ranford : 
'Thank Heaven I find nothing makes me weary of 
My life, thou art ſcandalous; hy doft thou abuſe 
This Age ſo? methinks, it's as pretty an Honeſt 
Drinking Whoring Age as a Man wou'd wiſh to 
Live in, 
Starf. Sure, Lovel, thou wer't born without a Gall, 
Or bear*lt thy anger like a uſeleſs thing, 
That czn'it endure to live among ſuch Fools, 
As we are every Day condemn'd to ſce. 
Lov, Where's the Tronble ? 
Stanf. Sure thou art Inſenſible, or thou woud'ſt not ask me, 
Iam more teſtleſs then the Man that has 
A Raging Fever. an him; and like bim, 
| change my place, thinking to eaſe my ſelf; but find 
That which ſhould lelſen does increaſe my paio. 
Lov. As how Sir? 
Stanf. Could any Man have born bnt yeſterdays impertinence 3- 
Lov, What was that ?- for-l have not feen- you ſince, 
Staxf. In the Morning, 
Coming abroad to find you out, (the only Friend 
With whom | can enjoy my ſelf ) comes in a brisk 
Gay Coxcom? of the Town——— © Lord, Sir, (fays he ) 
lam glad I've taken you within, I come on purpole 4 
To tell you the news, d*ye hear it? Then might 1 
Reaſonably expect to hear of ſome great Intrigue or 
Other; At the leaſt that the Kings of France and Spain X 
Were agreed-——Then after he had bid me gueſs whe 
Four or five times, with a-great deal of amazement | 
Says be: Jack Scatterbrain comes in with ten Guineys 
Laſt night into the Groom-Porters, and 
Carry'd away 2co; and then Teaz*d me 
Half an Hour, to t*ll me all his Throwes: 
Lov. Now, ſhould I have been pleas'd with this, 
»4avf, You make me madto hear you ſay ſo, 


So 4.4 w 


The Impertinents. 
Lov If you are weary of one Company, why don't 
You try another ? and vary your Companions as often 
As your Young Gallants do their Miltreſſes, or 
The Well-bred Ladies their Servants. 
Stanf. Where e*re þ gol meet the ſame affliction ; If Igo' 
lato the City, there I fiad a Company of Fellows 
Selling of their Souls tor Two-peace in the Shilling 
Profit. 
Lew, You are too Satyrical 
Stanf. Beſides I find the very Fools T avoid at this 
End of the Town, come thither, ſome-to take 
Up Money at Ten in the Hundred; what with 
Intereſt and Brokage, as they call ic; others to take 
Up Commodities upon Tick, which they fell at half 
Value for ready Money, and thele Inhumane Raſcals 
Prh very midit of all their buſine(s will ix upon 
Me, and 1 am more barbaroully usg'd by e*m, then a 
New Poet by a Knot of Criticks. 
Lov, So Sir! go on with your Relation. 
Staxf. The other day, being tyr'd almoſt to death with the 
Impertinence of Fopps that importun'd me; 
For Variety, I ventur'd into a Cottee.houſe ; 
There 1 found a Company of formal Starch*d Fellows 
Talking Gravely, Wiſely, and nothing to the purpole; 
And with undaunted Impudence diſcourſing of the 
Right of Empires; the Management of Peace and War; 
And the great Intrigues of Councils; when o*my 
Conſcience you wou'd have ſooner took e'm for 
Tooth-Drawers then Privy-Counſellors, 
Lov. But why don't you make this 
Pleaſant to your ſelf and laugh at *em as I do? 
Sranf. 'Faith Sir, I] cannot find the Jeclt ore. 
Low. Yet methioks however this ſhould not make mz 
Uneaſie to my felt. 


Stang. Sure, Lovel, you have patience more then ever Stoick had ; This 
damn'd Impertinence makes me. reſoly'd to tly my Country, I can never 
fiad one hours refreſhment in a Year : If I go to the Theatre, where all : 
People hope to pleaſe themſelves; either | find an Inſupportable Play; oc 
if a good one ill ated; or which is worſe, ſo many troubleſom Wits: 


buzzing about my Ears, that I am driven from thence too. 
Lov. It this torments you fo, then change the Scene, and 
Go to Court, where Converſation is refin'd. 


Stanf. Why ſol do; but there I fhiud a company of gaudy nothings 


That tain would be Courtiers; that think they are 
Hardly dealt withal not to have Imploymeat too ; 
Beſides, when after. all my perſecutions, I think 
Tocalſe my ſelf at night by {leep, as laſt n'ght: 


x The Sulten Lovers ; Or, 


About eleven or twelve of Clock; at a folemn 
Funersl the Bells ſet out: That Men ſhould be 


Sch Owls to kcep five thouland . 
People a%ake. with Ringing a Ppeal ro him that docs not hear'it! 
Loy. But *tis geacroully done, eſpecially fince in my 

Conlcici. e they expett no thanks tor their Labour, 

Neither from their Dead Friend, nor any one elle. 

Stanf. A Curie upon 'em, this was no ſooner paſt, but 

About two in the Morning comes rhe Bell-man, 

Acd in a diſmal Tone repeats worſe Rhimes 

Then a Caſt Poet of the Nurſery can make; after 
Him, come thoſe Rogues that wake People with theic 
Barbarous tunes, and upon their Toting 

Inſtruments make a more H-lliſh Noiſe then they 

Do at a Play-houſe, when they flourith for the 
Entrance of Witches. 

Lov, All this diſturbs not me: But if you are troubled 
With this Noiſe, why don'c you live in the Country ? 

There you may be free. 

Stanf. Free! Yes to be drunk with March.Beer, and Wine, worſe then 
ever was ferv'd in at Pye-corwer at the eating of Pigs; and hear no other 
Diſcourſe, but of Horſes, Dogs, and Hawks. 

L ov. | wou'd not be of your uneaſie diſpoſition for 
The World : But granting all this : Cannot the 
Women of the Town pleaſe you? methinks 
The pretty Devils have Charms enouzh to keep me 
In the World ſtill without the Danger of being 
Felo-de-ſe 

Stavf. Women! O! name &©m not : They are impertinence 
It ſelf, 1 can ſcarce endure the ſight of e*n{ 

Lov. Why thou art ſtark-mad ; *faith tor my part I 
Nere met with any of the Sex that was kind and 
Pretty, but I cou'd bear with her Impertinence. 

Stanf. It cannot be, 

Lov. No! wou'd thoud'ſt try me: And bring 
Me to a New Woman that's handſom; If 1 
Boggrd at her Impertinence, may I never have 
Other to help me at my Neceſſity, then an Oyſter- 

Wite, or one that cries Ends of Gold and Silver : 
Methinks Beauty and Impertinence do well enough 
T ozether. 

S tanf. Sure you railly with me all this while 
Be lo ſtupid to think 1 have not reaſon in my SO 
*)p1nion 3 but nothing I have ever told you yet 
Has cquald the perſecution of this Day. 
ma t n= _ that concerns-—-prethee let me 
| » Laat 1 may laugh a little at thoſc 


Jo? 


S_ <4 


= 


The Itmpertinents. s 


Monkeys 3 The Variety of their folly always 
Afﬀords new matter. 

Stanf. Thatit does, to my ſad experience ; This morning, juſt as I was 
coming to look for you, Sir Poſitive At-a!l, that Fool, that will let no 
Man underſtand any thing in his Company, Arreſts me with his Imperti- 
nence; ſays he, with a great deal of Gravity, perhaps I am the Man of 
the World that have found out two Plays, that betwixt you ” | have a 
great dcal of Witin em ; Thoſe are, the Silent Womay, and the Scornful 
Lady And if 1 underſtand any thing in the World, there's Wir 
cnoogh, in both thofe, to make one good Play, If | had the management of 
e*m : For you mult know, this is a thing | have thought upon and conlider'd: 

Lov. This is the plcafanrt'ſt thing I ever heard 

Stanf. May you have enough on'e then if you think ſo; 

But this was not all, for notwithſtanding | 

Granted his opinion, he forc*d me to ſtay an 

Hour ro hear his Impertinent Reaſons for't 

But no ſooner, by fome happy Accident or 

Other, had | gotrid of him, but in comes 

That tamiliar Loving Puppy Woodcock, that admires 
Fools for Wits, and torments me with a dama'd 
Coranto, as he calls it, vpon his Violin, which he usd 
So barbarouſly, 1 was ready to take it tor a 

Bag-pipe. 

Lov, This would have made me broke my Spleen with Laughter. 

$tanf, I mult be ſtung with a Tarrantula, before Icould laugh at it : but 
here my perſecntion did not end; For after | had got looſe fromthe other 
two, whom ſhould [ lee as I came along, but that infinite Coxcomb Poet 
Ninny : who by force of Arms hales me into his Lodging, and read me there a 
Confounded Scene in Heroick Verſc: ſo that what with Sir Poſtive*sOrations, 
IV oodeorks (queaking Fidile, and Poet Ninny's Heroick Fultian, I have a grea» 
ter \Vind mill in my brainthen a New Politician with his head full of Refor-- 
mation; but as Fate wou*d have it, in came a Duan, and out got I and for 
tear of furthe: Interruption, came back to my Lodging, ( Enter Roger. 

Roger. O Sir! here*s Poet Niniy, ( Enter Ninny. 

StenF. | ha? but nam'd the De1hl, and fel have raiv'd him. 

Ninn. Mr. Lovel, Your humble Scrvaat, 

Lov. Sweet Mr, Ninny, 1am yours. 

Ninn. But dear Mr. Stanford, 1 am infaitely troubled, 

Thar that unmaunnerly Raſcal ihou% come and difturb 
Us juſt now : But you know, Sir, we ca240t help, the 
Impertinence of Fooliſh idle Fellows. 

Stanf, No, no! you have convinc,d me ſufficiently of that, ( Ade 
How the devil could he follow me? I think the ( Level. and Nunny whiſper 
Raſcal ha's as good a Noſe as a !}1ood Hoand 

Ninn. | havga Copy of Heroick Veries will fit him 
] warrant you, 

Loy. Read em to him, he's a great Judge I can aſlure you, 


Ming: 


6 T he Sullen Lovers , Or, 

Ninn. Sir, I am happy to meet with one that is ſo great 
A judgeof Poetry as you are, for it is « miſerable 
Thing for an Author to expoſe his things to empty 
Giddy fellows: and let me tell you, between you and 
1, there are Teven thouſand Fools to ſeven Wiſe Men. 

Lov. That ſo great a Truth ſhould be ſpoken by one 
That Ile ſwear is none of the ſeven! 

Stanf. "Now do you judge Lovet: ( Exter Woodcock. 
*Slife, another Teazer here! Woodcock? 

IV 24d. Dear Ninny, Ah dear Lovel: Ab my dear ack Stanford, lam the hap- 
pieſt Man in thy Friendſhip of any Man's upon ( Kiſes them all, 
Earth, Dear Fack, | have the greateſt value for thee in the World; prethee 
Kiſs me agen dear Heart, 

Stanf. Now Lovel, Have I reaſon or not? 

Lov. That you have to Laugh ; this is my recreation. 
| Starf. Well! if 1 do not leave the World within thefe three days; Ma 
] be «ernally baited by Sir Poſitive. Ninny, and Vodeock, which is a Curſe 
worſe then the worſt of my Enemies Wilhes. ( Ade, 

I/od, Hay ! Art thou reſolv'd to give over the World too 
Dear Heart ? There's a Lady that came to Town 
Yeſterday that is of the ſame mind : ſhe told me 
So, but hope ſhe will not, for the truth on' is 
Fack, 1 amin Love with her, 

Ninn. Are you ſo? but | hope I ſhall catch her from you for all that. 

I/ord. She ſays ſhe's fo troubled with Impertinent People, which, be- 
tween you and 1 fack, areſo numerous in this Town, that a Man cannot live 
in quiet for e'm, that ſhe's reſolv*'d to leave the World to be quit of e*m. 

Ninn, Yes, Faith ſhe told me fo laſt night as 1 was reading 
A Scene of my Play to her. 

Starf. No doubt ſhe bad reaſon. 

Wood. *Tis your Acquaintance Ned Lovel, Carolins*'s Siſter, Emilia. 

Lov. Now Stanford I'le oblige you, and bring you 
Acquainted with this Lady ; Certainly her humor 
Will pleaſe you. 

Stanf. My Friend torment me too! Have I not Impertinent 
Acquaintance enough already; but you maſt endeayour 
To trouble me with more ? 

IWood. Well! that's an Excellent Copy of 
Verles of thine, Dear Ninny, Come on Jack, 

1 hou ſhalr hear e*m, 
Stanf. Hell and Damnation! ( Offers to go out, 
Ninn, Hold, hold ; You ſhall hear, 

Your ſad indifference<=—_( Look you'Sir, 'tis upon a 

Lady that is indifferent in her Carriage toward me ) 

Your ſad indifiereyce——(1 am confident this 

Will pleaſe yon, hereare many thoughts I was. bappy in 

And the C'.oice of words not unpleaſant, which you < 


The Impertments. 

Know is the greateſt matter of all) — Your ſad indifference 

So wounds — (Look you, you ſhall find as much 

Soul and Force, and Spirit, and Flame in this, as ever you 

Saw in your Life.) 
Woed. Come, Feck, hear't, it is a moſt admirable piece. 


Stenf. Now, 1, what think you? (Love! laughs. 


Gentlemen, 1 have Extraordinary Buſineſs, 
I muſt leave you. 
Ioed. No, no, hold ! Faith thou ſhalt ſtay and hear 
His Verſes, they are as good as ever were read : 
Come, Ninny ——— 

Sranf. O Devil ! What have I deſerv'd to have this 
Ioflited upon me ? 

Ninu. 7 Your fad indifference ſo wounds my fair, 

Reads. 5 At once | hope, and do at once deſpair. 

How. do you like that, ha ? — 
You do at once both hate and kindneſs ſhow ; 
And are at once both kind and cruel too, 

Word. O! Very fine! Ist not, Ned? 

Lov, O ! Extream fige, 

Stanf. What the Devil makes you commend theſe ſottiſh Verſes, 
That are nothing but a Jingling of Words ? 
Let's go. 

Ninn, Hold ! hold! hold, hear the reſt ; hem 

Reads = _ my hopes you nouriſh _ deſtroy, 

ex. Grief, and yet my only Joy. 
Od bun oo hr Crmnkevhn, y Joy 

Stanf. O Devil! 

Ninn. } Virtye and Vice at once in you do ſhine; 

reads, { Your Inclinations are, and are not mine. 

Wod, O Admirable! Didſt ever hear any thing fo 
Fine in thy life, Dear Heart ? 

Stauf. O how theſe Curs bait me ! 
Ninny resds { At once a ſtorm and calm 1 do eſpy, 
"agen. And do at once a ſmile and frown deſcry. 
At once you kindle and put out my flame: 
I cold as Ice, as hot as Charcoal an. 
Mark that, Mr. Stanford, I was very happy ia that 
Thought, as I hope to breathe, 
Word, Upon my word, Fack, that's a great flight of his, 


Rog. Sir, methinks there's as pretty a Soul in't, as a Man ſhall ſee in a 


Summers Day, 
Sranf. What am 1 condemn'd to ? 


Lov. Why do you torment your ſelf thus? methinks nothing can bs 


pleaſanter. 
Seznf. Gentlemen, detaia me not, I'll ſtay no longer, 


Ninn. Dear Mr. Stanfird, | hs jult done, if you have any reſpect in 
C 


rs The Sullen Lovers; 0r, 
the World for me, ſtay and. hear the end ow. 

Wod. Nay, *Faith Jack, thou ſhalc ſtay.
