Requested Title: THE AMOROUS WIDOW
Authors: Thomas Betterton
Matched Alias: The amorous widow; or, the wanton wife
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_eighteenth-century_the-amorous-widow-or-t_betterton-thomas_1710
Source Title: The amorous widow: or, the wanton wife. A comedy. As it is perform'd by Her Majesty's servants. Written by the late famous Mr. Thomas Betterton. Now first printed from the original copy. 1710
Source Author: Betterton, Thomas
Source Date: 1710
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/amorous_widow_1710_djvu.txt
Notes: Curated salvage from a direct Internet Archive title match for Betterton's The amorous widow; or, the wanton wife, bounded from the printed title page to FINIS.

---
Amorous Widow: 
O R, T H E 


aufen WIFE. 


COMEDY. 


As it is Perform'd by . 


Her Majesrr's Servants. 


* 


— 
3 a * FO + — — * bY 
— ä * 


Written by the late Famous 


Mr. THOMAS BETTERTON. 


— — SY 


/ 


Now firſt Printed from the Original Copy. 


— 22 — 


LONDON: 
Printed in the Year 1710. 


Dramatis Perſonæ. 


IR Peter Pride. A great Boaſter of his Ho- | 
nour, his Valour, what a noble Family he is C Mr. Freeman. 
deriv'd from, and of their mighty Courage. 
Cuningham. A Gentleman in love with Philadel- 
phia, and is much courted by the Widow, 
RET: His Friend, in _—_— Mr. Brittle's | 
Wife, and endeavours to have an Intrigue 
with her ; but the Widow courts Him Mg, BetFarfons 
too. 
Barnaby Brittle. An old Citizen that keeps a Glaſs- 
Mop, marry'd to Sir Peter Pride's Daughter. * 
Jeffrey. Servant to Cuningham, in love with Mr. Fieldhouſe 
Prudence. >! ; 2 


* 


Mr. Verbruggen. 


Clodpole. A ſimple Country Fellow that Lovemore N ir Bright. 
employs in ſending Letters to Mrs. Brittle. : 5 
Merryman. A Falconer to Cuningham, who takes 


upon him to repreſent the Viſcount Sans- Mr. Underbill. 
Terre, that is to marry the Widow. 5 Ry 


Lady Laycock. An amorous old Widow, that courts 
every one ſhe can for Marriage, fancying her 
o_ ſo engaging, that all that ſee her mult & Mrs. Leigh. 
ove her. - Kip." a > | 

Lady Pride. Wife ou Peter, a formal old Lady 
that boaſts much of her Gentility, and of her £ Por 
great Name and Family. ' Mrs. Willis. 

Mrs. Brittle. Their Daughter, Wife to Bar- 
naby Brittle ; a Cunning, Intrieguing Co- 
qu uet, that always over-reaches her Hus- 

and 


Pbiladelpbia. Niece to the Widow, in love with dun. Porter, 


Cuningham. 


Mrs. Bracegirdle, 


Prudence. Maid to the * _ Mrs. Hunt, 
Damaris. Maid to Ms. Brittle, that aſſiſts her in Þ 
her lntriegues. rg zur, Prince. 
. & F 


* 
9 82 
: »4 . ys 
* 


THE 


2 \ 7 | / 5 W 
E SIC] 


I H E 
Amorous Widow: 
© THE 

WANTON WIFE. 


** 


4 


ACT I. ScENE à Room. 


Enter Philadelphia with 4 Letter, follow'd by 
Jeffrey. 


Should believe Mr, Cvning bam very 
conftant, if 1 had Faith enough to 
credit this Letter, Zefry. hat 
Complaints are here? But 'tis the 
Stile, that all young Lovers write. 


A 2 Jeß. 


. r 


4 The Amorone W idow : or, 


Fe. Pray, Madam, believe me; you know I am 


a Man of Integrity : I cannot diſſemble. Let him write 


what he pleaſes, If he did not love you, do you think 
I'd tell you ſo? e 
Phil. When he has Opportunity, I muſt confeſs, he 
ſays kind things to me. | 

Feff. Take my Word, Madam, my Maſter is not 
ike other Men- Unleſs he loves a Lady, and loves 
ber paſhonarely too, he never troubles himſelf to com- 

pliment her much. 

Phil. Never? Ves, Fey; ſometimes, you know, 
he compliments my Aunt. 

Feff. That's a convincing Proof of his Love to 
you; you cannot think him reduc'd to the Neceſſity 
of making Love to an antiquated Piece, with defign 
to know her otherwiſe, than to obtain rhe Happineſs 
of ſeeing you? But I ſhall tell him, Madam 

Phil. Tell him I have receiv'd and read his Letter. 

Zeff. Is that all, Madam? 

Phil. All! Yes. Are you not content with that? 
 Zeff. Any indifferent Perſon, that had Hands, and 

could but read, would have done, as much, as that. 
Phil. Well; Tell him then, in time perhaps I may 
Zeff. My Maſter, Madam, can't endure to depend 


on a perhaps. 


Enter Prudence. 


Pru. Quick, quick, up to your Chamber, Madam. 

Phil. What's the Matter? Is my Aunt coming hi- 
ther ? 

Peru. She's at your Heels. Go up the Back-Stairs 

quickly. g 5 

© Phil. Farewel, ey; Commend me to thy Ma- 
ſter. Exit Phil. 
Jeff. For what, I beſeech you? Is not my Maſter 

bewitc'd, to court a Lady a whole Year, and ſhe hard- 

ly tell him ſhe loves him yet? 


Pru, 


4s 


The Wanton if. 5 
Peru. Alas! She's but a Novice. Let me alone with 


her; I'll order the Buſineſs fo, that if thy Maſter be 
diſcreet and paſhonate enough in his Expreſſions, he 


wins her Heart I'il warrant you. 


Feff. He can ſay nothing to her, but that damn'd 
Aunt of hers is harkning to't ſtill. What Pleaſure can 
ſhe find in Love at Fifty? 

Pru. Fie, Zeffry, you muſt ſay Five and twenty. 

Jeff. I wonder any Woman can have the Impu- 
dence to live, and trouble Mankind after that Ape. 

Pru. There never was a Woman ſo old, but ſhe re- 
tain'd a good Opinion of her ſelf, 

Jeff. Then ſhe dreſſes her felt ſo fantaſtically, that 
all may ſee ſhe ſtrives to appear Young in defiance of 
Nature. She is more gawdy in that ſhe calls Half- 
Mourning, than a young Bride is on her Wedding- 
Night. The Devil's in her if ſhe believes any one 
can love her: 'Tis jeering her, but to be commonly ci- 
vil ro her, - 

Pra. A- little Flattery fires her. She believes all, 
that is ſaid to her: And he that does not make love 
to her, and compliment her, ſhall not be twice admit- 
ted to her Houſe. | 

Jeff. O reverend Beauty! on my Conſcience, if I 
would greaſe her Chops with a tew Compliments, 
ſhe'd mump and ſmile upon me. 

Pru. = 2 ge 3 5 

Jeff. When ſhall my Maſter have an ortunit 
to — freely to Philadelphia? 45 N 7 

Pru. Mr. Lovemore is thy Maſter's Friend, and is 
better belov'd here, than he imagines You mult per- 
ſuade him ro amuſe the Aunt, that Mr. Ching bam may 
have Convenience to court the Niece. | 

Feff. Mr. Lovemore's tir'd with playing that part ſo 
often; he is cloy'd with the Aunr, and ſwears he'll 
have no more of her. 


* 


— 


I A 3 Pr, 


6 The Amorous Widow : Or, 

Pru. I'm ſure her Niece and I endure much more. 
Tell him, *rwill be Charity in him to relieve us. 

Jeff. "Twill be hard to perſuade him to it. 
 Pru. This old Lady of mine bas languiſh'd for a 

young Husband ever fince Sir Oliver Laycock dy'd : 
She cares not what Eſtate he has, or what Religion 
he's of, ſo he be but young and luſty. Where is the 
great Viſcount Sans Terre, thy Maſter told her of? 
Methioks he's long a coming. 

Jeff. Some croſs unlucky Buſineſs hinders him. 
Peru. She has lately receiv'd ſome Letters, that 
have given a full Account of him. 

Jeff. So much the worſe. What is it? 

Pru, They ſay his Fortune is not very much, but 
he is greatly born, and very pleaſant ; and that he is 
ſo great a Lover of Muſick, he has not a Servant but 
can Sing or Dance, or Play upon ſome Inſtrument. 
You may know when he's come by the Noiſe; the 
Fiddlers will welcome him to Town; for all from 
Weſtminſter to Wapping pay him Homage. 

ZFefſ. Wou'd he were but marry'd to her, Pru- 
dence. | 

Pru. Whether he marries her or not, is not our 
Buſineſs, Zeffry. Let him but fool with us till thy 
yung has gain'd her Niece, and then our Work is 

one, | 

Zeff. Well, we have had enough of thy old Lady 
Laycock. Let us now talk of our own Affairs; ſpeak, 
doſt thou love me, Prudence ? 

Pra. A pleaſant Queſtion ! Do you doubt it now? 

Zeff. It you would have me credit you, ſwear it. 
Pru. Sure you are jealous Fey? 

Jef. You're ſomewhat near the Matter. I know 
your Humour well enough ; you love a bold audaci- 
ous Fellow, that will fay any thing, and ſuch a one 
we have come to Town, one Merryman our Falconer ; 
I tear you'll like him better than you do me. 


Pry. 


Ihe WamonWife. © 7 
Pra. Oh Fool! why ſhould you think ſo? _ | 
eff. I have ſome Honour in me; but he's a Fellow 


that has eaten Shame, and drank afrer ir, He is more 
— than a Court Page, and will take no De- 
a 


Pru. Hold your Tongue, here's my Lady. 
Enter Lady Laycock. 


Lady. What Buſineſs has Zeffry with you? 

Pru. His Maſter ſent him to know, whether he 
might have leave to wait upon your Ladyſhip this 
Morning. 

Lady. Ves; Tell him, I expeQ him. 

Zeff. He durſt not come, becauſe Mr, Lovemore'g 
with him. | 

Lady. Go tell 'em, if they pleaſe to come, they 
ſhall be welcome both, 

Jeff. I ſhall, Madam. (Exit Jeffrey. 

Pru. You ſee what Power your Beauty has. Nei- 
ther can live a Moment without ſeeing you, ; 

Lady. No, they have other Buſineſs with me, Pru- 
dence ,, they came from Paris lately, and brought me 
a Letter from my Brother; and I believe they come 
for my Anſwer now. 

Pru. But does not one of em love you, Madam? 

Lady. I have ſome Reaſon to believe he does; Mr. 
Lovemore has ſpar'd no Pains to perſuade me to quir 
my Widow- hood. | 

Pru. I have been told, Madam, that Widow-hood 
is a Gift, Heaven ſeldom beſtows but on its Favou- 
rites; you are rich, and know how troubleſome Mar- 
riage is. For my part, I believe the faireſt Hair, the 
beautiful'ſt Curls do not become your Fore-head ſo 
well as Bando did; but every one, Madam, knows 
their own Neceſſities. 5 

Lady 


* 


A 4 


8 The Amorous Widow : or, 


Lady. I confeſs, Widow- hood has its Conveniencies 
but if Marriage be a Trouble to ſome, tis a Pleaſure 
to others, Prudence. 

Pru. You had the Experience of it thirty Years, 
how did you like it, Madam? They ſay, Sir Olwer 
Laycock lov'd your Ladyſhip. 4 5 

Lady. For all that he was jealous; and, what's 
worſe, was Old. 

Pru. Very well; therefore you reſolve to have a 
young One now, Madam ? | 

Lady. You cannot blame me for that? Can you, 
Prudence? 


Pru. Oh no, *tis well known Youth is comforta- 


ble. But, methinks, you ſhould take one a little near- 

er your own Age, Madam. A very young Man may 

he too treacherous for you, Madam. | 
Lady. Why, is my Age ſo viſible ? 


Pru. No, Madam; with a little Help of Art you 


have ſome Remains of Beauty ſtill, You have ſome- 


thing about your Eyes as pleaſant now, as others have 
at Twenty. 

Lady. Tis a very malicious World we live in, Pru- 
dence ;, they are ſo apt to cenſure, and ſpeak of any 
ſingle Woman, that one ought to marry to avoid that 
Scandal. 

Pru. Some that are young are forc'd to marry, to 
avoid Detraction; others wou'd rather all that's III 
ſhould be ſaid of them, than to have no Notice ta- 
ken of em. I knew a young Lady that pin'd to a 
Conſumption, becauſe ſhe liv'd three Years about the 
Courr, and never had the Honour to be lampoon'd. 
The Truth is, none that are Beautiful and Young can 
avoid Envy, but few ate ſo malicious, to ſpeak againſt 
the Old. | * 

Lady. There is no Age exempt from Scandal, Pru- 
| dence, When we are Young, they ſay we fell our 


ſelves ; when Old, we are forc'd to hire, to buy our 


Lovers. Pru. 


2 ah OM A... "_- EY _—_— — 11 


The Wanton W ife. 9 


Pru. You know what they ſay, Madam, of the old 
Marchioneſs, your Friend, that was ſo admir'd, ſo 
courted in her Youth ; who, when ſhe found ſhe was 
forſook by all, was forc'd to hire a Player by the 
Quarter: How ſoon rhe poor Fellow was tir'd too! 
How like a Sheep-biter he look'd after the firſt two 
Months! 

Lady. This London is a very wicked Place, tis im- 
poſſible to live without Scandal here. 

Pru. I'm afraid they Il fay as much of you, Madam, 
if you bargain for a Husband. To covet one, that is 
both Young and Rich, is too much in Conſcience, 
Madam. 

Lady. Thou know'ſt, Prudence, Wealth is not the 
thing 1 ſeek. . 
Pru. Then, Madam, the Buſineſs is done; the 
Viſcount, Sans- Terre (ſhall be your Husband, Ma- 

dam.  \ 

Lady. Ah Prudence | if he were but as handſome 
28s— — 

Pru. Ah Madam, that's too much. 

Lady. Why may not I wiſh for it? 

Pru. Conſider his Quality, Madam, and bate him 
ſomething for that. One thing I muſt adviſe you ; 
be not too prodigal of your Gold at firſt ; to be li- 
heral ſometimes will be convenient, and make him 
kinder to you. 7 
Lady. For all this, I ſhould think my ſelf very 
happy, if I were certain of Mr. Cuningham or Mr. 
Lovemore. | 

Pru. A little Jealouſy will inflame em. They'll 
be more preiſing when the Viſcount comes. 

Lady. But yet methinks, Cuningham and my Neice— 

Pru. Whar, Madam ? 

Lady. Are always whiſpering. 

Pru. He only-compliments her, Madam, She's too 
young to make Love ſerioully, 


Lady. 


10 The Amorons Widow : Or, | 
Lady. With your Favour, there's no truſting to 
that. To my Knowledge, there are thoſe younger, 
than ſhe, that underſtand what Love is but too well. 
Pru. That's true, Madam; but Philadelphia is fo 


innocent, that no Man can make Love to her, but to 
divert himſelf. Here ſhe is, Madam, 


Enter Philadelphia. 


Lady. What does ſhe come for? I'll ſend her pack. 
ing quickly. 

Pru. Confider what you do, Madam. How can 
Mr. Lovemore entertain your Ladyſhip, unleſs his 
Friend may divert himſelf the while with rallying 
with your Niece. 

Lady. For all that I could wiſh—— 

Pru. 1 not your ſelf. Truſt me, Tl! 
watch her, Madam. 

Phil. Will your Ladyſhip go to Eaton's? The Coach 
is at the Door. 

Lady. No, Ill not go yet. 

Phil. If you ſtay long, Madam, the beſt Pont will 
be ſold before you come. | 

Lady. No matter. Ha ! what ails the Girl! 
How ſtrangely ſhe looks ! Her Eyes are hardly open 

ey 
, Phil. How, Madam ? 

Lady. Then her Head's dreſs'd awry. How it diſ- 
guiſes her! Lord! how frightfully it looks ! | 
Phil. Truly, Aunt, tis dreſs'd juſt as the Faſhion 
15. | 

Lady. Fetch her Hood, Prudence; I'll have her put 
it on till ir be mended. 


Phil. I dreſs'd it to pleaſe no body but my ſelf, 
. Madam, 


Lady. III have you dreſs your ſelf now to pleaſe 
me: Come, put it on. 


Pru. 


The Wanton Wife. at 


Pru. My Lady's in the Right. Never was a- 
ny thing more ridiculous. Here, put on the Hood, 
I am ſure this is much handſomer. 

Lady. Why domt you put it on? 

Phil. I can't endure it, Madam 

Lady. Do, I ſay. | 

Pru. So; Now it is as it ſhould be; all modeſt 
Maids ſhould be dreſg'd ſo : But here's Mr, Cuningham 
and Mr, Lovemore. | 


Enter Cuningham, Lovemore and Jeffry. 


Love. Your Servant, Madam; you ſee how we 
love your Company, by giving you this Trouble in a 
Morning. 

Cur. Tis a Happineſs we are much envy'd for. 

Lady. You are welcome, Gentlemen. Pray com- 
mand this Houſe as freely as your own, 

Love. Why does this Lady hide her Face? Pray, 
Madam, let us ſee you. | 

Lady. Forbear, Sir, I beſeech you : She has had 
the Tooth-Ach lately. If ſhe takes off her Hood, 
ſhe'll catch cold, and bring the Pain again. 

Phil. I thank your Ladyſhip for your Care of me. 
But the Pain has been gone ſo long, I don't fear it 
now, 

Love. Nay then, we muſt have it oft. 

Phil. What ſay you, Madam, Shall I pull it off? 

Lady. Yes, Impertinence; I ſee you have a Mind 
to ſhew your ſelf. 

Pru. Tis the Nature of all young Girls to do what 
they are forbidden. * 

Cun. I come not to trouble your Ladyſhip for your 
Letter to my Lawyer; your countenancing my Buſineſs 
will be of great Advantage to me. 

Lady. This, Sir, is wha+my Brother commands me: 
You ſhall ſee I take delight to ſerve his TOR. 

ove 


ö 
12 The Amorous Widow Or, 
4 Love. Madam, You promis'd me that Honourzhle 
itle. 

Lady. Do you pretend to it ? | 

Love. Yes, Madam, more, than any one. 

Lady. IT have not much Beauty to boaſt of; but 
Virtue, Sir, makes ſome amends for the DefeQts of the 
other. 

Love. Defects? (Cuningham Courts Philadelphia. 
Pray, Madam, wrong not your ſelf ſo much. 

Lady. There are few but know a little their own 
Value: And tho a Woman be not fam'd for a great 
Beauty, yet if ſhe be agreeable, there are thoſe, will 
like her well enough. 

Love. You have that in Perfection, Madam. 
Lady. In that, Sir, I know you do not flater, 
Phil. —— 

Phil. Madam. 
1 Then, Madam, you like my Choice of this 

it. | 
a Phil. Extremely well: Was it your own Fancy, 
Sit. ü 
Can. I am not aſham'd to own it, fince you ask it, 
Madam. 

D They counterfeit to be talking about Faſhions, whilſt 

ſeemingly Lovemore Courts the Aunt. 

Pr. T'll liſten to 'em | 
He talks to her of nothing but new Faſhions. wy, the 

You may, Madam, venture to diſcourſe IWzdow. 
withour diſturbance. 

Lady. Pray, Sir, tell me freely ; how old do you 
think I am? 

Love. Faith, Madam, if you were not a Widow, 
I ſhould think you a Girl ſcarce Twenty. 1 

Lady. Now, Sir, you flater me: You might have 
ſaid Thirty. I. do not love to diſguiſe my Age. 
Love. How! Thirty, Madam! and look ſo youth- 
ful: 11 not believe ir, tis impoſſibie! EET, 

| Lady, 


PN 


Pu —— 


The Wanton Wife. 13 

Lady. You do not know what Miſery I endur'd 

whilſt my old Husband liv'd. The Griefs I had upon 

me would have diſtracted another Woman. Alas! 
Sir, tis not Age but Sorrow has broke me. 

Love. It makes me fad to hear you tell it, Madam, 

and vexes me to think, an old Man ſhould enjoy ſuch 


Happineſs. | 
Lady. You do not know how many Tears I have. 


ſhed. | 

Love. *Tis ſome Comfort, Madam, to remember 
he did not live long with you. | | 

Lady. Truly, Sir, Fifteen Years. 

Pru. Yes, and Fifteen to that. (A/ide. 

Lady. Having been ſo unfortunate in a Husband, you 
may believe I have but little Encouragement to ven- 
—— Sir, again. For I am very happy now I am a- 
one. 

Love. Vou do wiſely, Madam; for ſhe deſerves 
not to be pity'd, that raſhly runs into the ſame Mis- 
fortune; and therefore you have, Madam — 

Lady. Nay, Sir, I have not forſworn Marry ing 

et. 
F Love. Pray, Madam, where do you uſe to walk in 
the Evening? Into St. Zames's Park? 

Lady. Not very often, Sir, 

Love. Or into the Mulberry Garden ? 

Is not the Wilderneſs very pleaſant ? 

Lady. If I like my Company, Sir, I never miſlike 
the Place. | 

Love. Have you ſeen the new Paradiſe, Madam? 
Tis much ſuperiour to the former. 

Lady. 1 have heard as much : But, Sir—— 

Love. Let me have the Honour to wait upon you 
thither preſently. 

L ady. Not yer, Sir; After Dinner, if you pleaſe. 
Bur tell me, Sir, do you think me ſuch an Enemy to 
Marriage, that were I ſure a young Gentleman lov'd 

me, 


14 Ihe Amorous Widow: Or, 


me, and lov'd me truly, I would be ſo uncivil to te- 
fuſe him ? | 

Love. When J conſider what you endur'd in Sir O. 
liver Laycock's time, I think you ought to do it, Ma- 
dam ; and that Man's unjuſt, that urges you to break 
your Reſolution. 

Lady. Pray do not miſtake me, Sir; I have made 
no ſuch Reſolution yet. 

Love. Nay, Madam, ſince you are diſpleas'd ar 
what I ſaid, we'll change the Diſcourſe. Pray, Ma- 
dam, do you think the young Lord Lucky has that In- 
tereſt at Court, that Fame reports he has? 

Lady. Lord, Sir, this is a ſtrange wild Anſwer to 
my Queſtion. Let me tell you, Sir, if I have any 
Merir, Wealth or Beauty, there's one in the World 
 Veſerves em all. | 

Pru. Good! How ſhe teazes him! (Aſide. 

Love. But has that one no Fault, Madam? 
Lady. You know him very well, Sir. 

Love. I know him, Madam! 

Lady. Yes, you, Sir. *Tis your ſelf. 

Love, *Sdeath ! What will become of me now? 

(Aide. 
Enter a Servant. 


Serv. Madam 
Lady. What now? 
Serv. The Marchioneſs is come to viſit you, 
Lady. Troubleſome Creature. Go one of you and 
entertain her quickly. 
Pru. Which of us, Madam? * 
Lady. Go you, Philadelphia, and keep her Compa- 
ny till I come, - 


Phil. I ſhall, Madam. (Exit Phil. 


Cun. Pray, Madam, what is this Marchioneſs? 
Lady. Oh, Sir! a moſt eternal Talker: Her Tongue 


goes like the Larum of a Clock, as faſt, and to the 


4 {ame 


- The Wantou Wife, 15 


me Tune ſtill. She's almoſt Sixty, and yet pretends 
to Beauty, and loves Courtſhip moſt unreaſonably, 
Say but a kind thing to her, and you win her Heart. 
The Truth is, ſhe has not much Reputation ; but the 
Reſpect I give her is to her Quality and to her Perſon, 
But ſhe's an Original in her kind, Sir. 
Love. Oh blind, blind Creature ! ſhe draws her own 
Picture, and laughs at it. ö 
Cun. Sure, Madam, her Converſation muſt be vety 
pleaſant ? ; | 
Lady. She has been much courted in her Youth 
but twould make one die to hear her boaſt of her 
Lovers now. How this Knight ſighs, and that 
Lord dies for her; when all the while I know what 
Neceſſity the poor Creature is reduc'd to. I would 
have brought her hither, but I know we never ſhould 
have been rid of her. Excuſe me a Moment, I'll ſend 
her away, and return preſently. Your Servant, Gen- 
tlemen, Exit Lady. 
Cun, How now, Friend What's the Matter? 
Why doſt look ſo ſullenly ? | 
Love. 1 play the Aſs here any longer! No; if I do, 
may I turn Pudding to a Rope-Dancer, and ſhewTricks 
next Bartholomens Fair, 
Cun. Nay, but Friend, Dear Friend 
Love; Tell not me of Friendſhip. What Man 
would endure to be ſo plagued as 1 have been. I 
have patty d with my beſt Skill the dangerous Thruſts 
that ever were made at me. To tug at an Oar, or 
| FN dig in a Mine in Peru, is Recreation to it. But the 
alt time to offer Marriage to me! I ſweat to think 
on. it, It made me tremble twice, for fear ſhe ſhould 
* | have forc'd my Neck into her muddy Nooſe of Ma- 


trimony. 
. | Cur. We have no other way to blind her. 
Love. Tis all one to me. 
e 
oy 


Cur. 


16 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Cun. If thou lov'ſt my Life, Friend, do not forſake 
me now. ht 

Love. Pray live, if you pleaſe, and give me leave 
to do {> too. Should I again be left alone with her, 
the beſt I can hope for is DiſtraQtion. 

Pru, How do you like the Niece ? 

Cun. She's all Perfection. 

Pry, How do you thrive? Do you find her kind, 
Mr. Cuning ham? | 

Cun. She has promis'd me a Meeting this After- 
noon, if thou canſt but remove the Aunt from us. 

Pra. Til try what I can do, but Mr. Lovemore is 
the only Man in her Favour. 

Cun. Dear Friend, try but this one. 

Love, TIl be hang'd, drawn, and quarter'd for a 
Traitor firſt, and have my Limbs hung up for the 
Birds to feed upon. No, no, I have my Belly full, 
I thank you, and ſome to ſpare. e | 

Pru. But now I think on't, where's this Viſcount 
all this while? His Arrival wou'd be of great uſe in 
this Affair. 

Love. Prudence adviſes well: Methinks he's long 
a coming. 

Cun. Why, you muſt know, there is one Merryman 
Juſt come up our of the Country - He is my Falconer 
upon occaſion, the Fellow is bold, and very apt, and 
has not been ſeen much in Town. What think you 
of him to act awhile, till ſome more lucky Occaſion 
preſent it ſelf? 

Love. *Tis a lucky Thought, and may be of uſe. 
Where is he ? 08 

Zeff. In the Pantry, a ramming down a Wedge of 
Roaſt-Beef ro keep out the Town Air, and making 
Sport with a {imple Country Fellow he has brought 
out of the Country with him to ſee the Town; one 
Clodpole, he calls him. 


Love. 


22 = = JS 


The Wanton Wife. 17 


Love. *Twould not be amiſs to examine him, and 
iuſtruct him how to behave himſelf, before he is too 
much known. 

Jeff. No body of the Family has ſcen him, yet, 
but the Butler; and he, I know, will be ſecret. 

PII ſtep and call him to you, Sir, it you pleaſe ? 


Cun. Do ſo. | (Exit Jeff. 
In the mean time, Prudence, there's ſomething to buy 
thee a Pair of Gloves. (Gives ber Money. 


Piru. Oh, dear Sir! how long have I deſerved this? 
Pleaſe ro command me any thing within my Power, 
and conclude it done. 


Enter Jeffrey with Merryman dreſsd like a Falconer. 


Jeff. Sir, P found him juſt paſſing by the Door, 
and have told him part of the Buſineſs. 

Love. Well, Friend, doſt think thou can'ſt act the 
Part of a Viſcount for a little while ? 

Merr. What ſort of a Lord is he to be? 

Cun. Oh! An Amorous Reſolute ſort of a Perſon, 
that's much given to love Mufick. You ſhall have 
all things that's fitting for a Man of ſuch Quality. 


Merr. Well, Sir, let me be once ſet out with a | 


good Equipage, and leave the reſt to me. 
Love. Come with us, Friend, and we'll inſtruct 
thee fully in thy Part. 
Merr. Well, give me but my Cue of Entrance, and 
let me alone ro a& my Part. 
Can Let's about it then. (Exit Lovemore, Cuningham 
Jeff. Prudence and Merry man. 
Pra. What's your Will? 
. Feff. One Kiſs. 
Pry. *Pſhaw! Is that all? (He &ifſes her. 
Feff. All! I fay no more, but—— 
Ah Prudence, Prudence ! 


B Pru. 


* 
4 
4 
al 
2 
7 
4 
] 
2 
* 
. 
I 


* - 
4 5 . * - 4 
e 


—— 


WT < Abt ; = — 2 


18 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Pru, What damnable whining Tone haſt thou got, 
ha? 

Jeff I am afraid of this Viſcount, Prudence. 

Pru. Away, you Fool; I have other things to trou- 
ble my Head withal—— Fatewel. 

Jef. Adieu. (Exeunt ſeverally, 


— 
2 — wy 


ACT II. 


Enter Cuningham and Philadelphia. 


Cun, WE „Madam, are you ſo unwilling to 

ah what my conſta Paſſion. ſo 
long in vain, has urg'd ? Do you not believe I love 
you? Oh! Did you but know what I endure, when 
you refuſe to hear me, you would in Charity have 
ſome Compaſſhon on my wounded Soul. 

Phil. I dare not hear this Language from you, Sir. 

Cun, Whar are you afraid of, Madam ? 

Phil. All Men ſay the ſame things, Sir, till they 
have won our eaſy Hearts to pity and believe you; 
then ſtraight you flight your Conquelt, and leave us 
to purſue our Ruin. 

Can. Be not fo cruel to cenſure all for thoſe Faults, 
which ſome few commit; tor all, I muſt confeſs, do 
not ſtand excus'd. Bur, Madam, you cannot be ſo 
great: a Scranger to my Love, as not to think it real; 
or fo great an Enemy to your own Worth, to believe 
it has not Power to enſlave a Heart, that's guarded 
more ſecurely than mine Bur no more 
Your Aunt—— 


Enter 


The Wanton Wife. 19 
Enter Lady Laycock. 


Lady. So Niece, I ſee your ſqueamiſh Stomach can 
digeſt all ſorts of Diet, rho ne&'er ſo ſtrictly charg'd 
to the contrary. Mr. Cuningham, What Buſineſs have 
you with her? I wonder you are not atham'd to be 
always following of her at this rate, and endeavouring 
to take Advantage of her fooliſh Youth ; for ſhe is 
but a Girl yer, and not fir for the Converſation of a 
Man, nay, or indeed to be truſted with her elf. 

Cun. Madam 

Lady. Go, go, indeed you are much to. blame: 
What will the World judge, think you? Or what 
Excuſe can I make, for ſuffering ſuch Doings in my 
Houſe ? And you, Huſwife! how dare you diſobey my 
Commands? Is this the Reſpect you pay to me, and 
to my Quality! I believe, in a little time I muſt 
make ir my whole Imploy to invite home young Gal- 
lants, forſooth, to pleaſure you, whilſt I, as it I 
were your Slave, muſt rerire, and wait till you are 
ſerv'd firſt. *Tis come to a fine paſs indeed; bur 
Fl put an End to it all, and keep you always lock'd 
up in your Chamber, I will ſo. 

Phil. I told you; Sir, what would be the Event of 
your Projects, but you would not be ſaid nay. I 
muſt be an Inſtrument ro make your Paſſion known, 
and none ſo fit to be truſted with ſuch an Affair as I; 
bur henceforward if you can't ſpeak tor your ſelf, you 
may hang or drown, as you pretend, for me, for [1 
no more get Anger for you, 

Cun. What does ſhe mean? 

Lady. What's that you ſay? 

Phil. Mr. Cuningham here, Madam, is always urging 
me to tell your Ladyſhip the Paſſion he has for 
you. | 


Lady. Saucy Slut ! | 
4 F B 2 Phil. 


20 - The Amorous Widow : Or, 


PH. As if he could not ſpeak for himſelf, but 
* muſt be ſtill plaguing me, and ſwearing how long, 
how well, and how tenderly he loves you , then ſighs 
and cries, Oh Philadelphia! Can I live without her ? 
Bur ſhe, cruel as ſhe is, has vow'd to die unmarried. 

Cun. Oh the Devil! What will become of me 
now ? 

Phil. Then raves worſe, than any one in Bedlam, 
crying, And mult I then loſe her ſo? Oh! Death to 
all my Hopes! I mult not, cannot, will not! and a 
thouſand ſuch like things, which I'm refolvd never 
to hear again. So, Sir, don't trouble me any more, 
but een {peak what you have to ſay to her your ſelt. 

Exit. 

Lady. Is this true, Mr. Cuningham? I did DA. ra 
there was a Man living, which cou'd love at that rate, 
and with ſuch Conſtancy. | 

Can. Oh! Madam ! what ſhall I ſay, fince all is 
fill in vain! Your Vow, your cruel Vow, has van- 
quiſh'd all my Hopes; then where ſhould I ſeek for 
Peace, but in my laſt Retreat, the Grave. Fare. 
well ; I cannot bear to ſtay, for every Look adds new 


\ Poiſons to my Soul. (Is going. 
Lady. Stay, Si I have made no ſuch Vow. If 
your Paſſion | 


Cun. Oh, Madam! forbear. I know your Good- 
neſs to be ſuch, that rather, than be the Inſtrument of 
what may happen, you would ſeemingly comply 
with any thing I can ask. Pardon me, Madam, I 
have been too much deceiv'd already. 

Lady. Pray ſtay, Sir, do not miſtaxe 


Enter Philadelphia with a Piece of Poynt. 


Phil. Oh, Madam, here's the fineſt Piece of Poynr 
I ever ſaw, and the cheapeſt; pray, Madam, look 


at it. 
4 Lady 


Bn ©” pow! A oO Cm 


The Wanton Wife. 21 


Lady. Saucy Intrufion. How durſt you come with- 
out being call'd ? How often have I told you this, 
you Minx: Be gone, and leave it in the next Room, 
till I pleaſe to come and look on. 

Phil. Madam, the Woman, that brought it is in 
haſte, ſhe bid me tell your Ladyſhip. . 

Lady. Let her go about her Buſineſs, if ſhe car't 
wait, for I'll not come yet. (Exit Philadelphia. 
How horribly unlucky was this to diſturb me, juſt as 
I was going to tell him of my Intentions, and of my 
Concern for his Paſſion. (4/ide. 

Cun. I believe I am troubleſome, Madam. (Is going. 
Farewel. | 

Lady. No, pray ſtay, Sir, I have ſomething to ſay 
to you, but that young Slut interrupted me. 

Cun. Oh the Devil! 

Lady. But as I was going to ſay, I did indeed reſolve 
not to marry any more ; and when you have heard 
me out, you'll ſay I had Reaſon. 
You muſt know, in my Husband Sir Oliver's Days, I 
had not that Liberty, perhaps, as other Ladies of 
Quality took; for, to ſay Truth, my airy Tem- 
per and my Youth, at that time, made my Hus- 
band grows jealous, tho' without Cauſe, Heaven 
knows. 

Cun. That I dare ſwear, if all were of my Mind. 

(Aſide. 

Lady. Which made him lead me a very uneaſy Life: 
So that it made me reſolve on many things at that 
time, and one was this, That if ever Sir Oliver ſhould 
die, I never would marry again ; but I don't remem- 
ber that I ſwore to it: Or if J had, you have ſuch 
2 way with you, twould be very hard to deny you 
any thing, Mr. Cuningham. | 

Cun. Oh, Madam! —— Your Charity comes now 
too late: I am paſt all Hope. 


B 3 Lady. 


22 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Lady. Oh, dear Sir, ſay nöt o! for ſince you ſay 
your Diſcaſe is grown to that Extremity, that unleſs 
your Love meet Feward—— 

Can. Talk not o Im-»>0fhbilicies. I know how 
much you pr Ze your Honour ; And fince you have 
vow'd nee 1G marry, I have nothing left to hope 
for cllc. | 

Lady. Iis ring, Mr. Cuningham, | would not have 
my Honour ſuffer ; bur what remains beſide that I 
can do, to fave you from what may be dangerous, 
ſhall not be wanting. 


Enter Prudence and Philadelphia. 


Pru, Oh, Midam! Madam! the rareſt News 
The Viſcount Sans Terre, whom you have fo long 
expected, is juſt arriv'd, and is coming hither with 
a huge fine Equipage, Fiddles, and other Inſtru- 
ments. 

Lady. Oh dear! how I'm ſurpriz'd ! I would not 
have him ſee me thus for all the World. Prudence, 
vec my Curls right, and alter my Knots ; Quickly, 
don't ſtand fumbling-—-—- | | 
Look if the Paint be firm. | 

Pra. *Tis pretty well, Madam; Therc's here and 
there a ſmall Crack, but "(will not be diſcern'd at 
diltance, 

Lady. Quickly, good Prudence: Put me a little 
better in Order. You'll pardon me, Sir: You ſee what 
a Fright I'm in. 

(un. Pardon, quotha ! the Devil take me, if any 
thing could be more freely granted. (Aſide. 


Fe, 


The Wanton Wife. 23 


Enter the Viſcount Sans Terre, with Muſick, and 4 
good Eguipage; attended by Lovemore and ſeveral 
Gentlemen, The Viſcount ſings as be enters. 


A CATCH. 


Rom the North I came, 
Where I heard of the Fame 
Of the Lady Laycock's Beauty 1 
I had paſsd for an Afs, 
Had I flay d where I was, 
And not done a Viſcount's Duty. 


Viſc. Oh! are theſe the Ladies? N 
By your Favour, Swect Lady. (Kiſſes Philadelphia. 
A delicate Morſel, by this Hand. 7; 
Madam, I ſce that Fame has jultly ſpoke your Praiſe. 
You are indeed the Wonder of all your Sex. 

How fair ſhe is! 

Lady. What does he mean ? = 
ic. Pray, Madam, what young Gentlewoman is 
that, whoſe matchleſs Beauty ſeems to fill the Place 
with more, than common Brightneſs ? Sufe *ris ſome 
Goddeſs, dropt from Heaven for Men to worſhip ! 
Fair Angel, pardon this rude Attempt : EE 
The Honour only of your fair Hand. ( Kiſſes it. 
For till I rouch it, I cannot think you mortal. 

Lady. Oh, dear Sir ! You make me bluſh. 

Vif. [To Phil.] Pray, Lady, is this pretty young 
Gentlewoman your Niece ? 

Phil. (Afide.} This Fellow muſt be a Fool, or he 
could ne er miſtake ſo groſly. 

Pra. | To Phil.] Now we ſhall have rare Sport. 
Sure he's blind to miſtake you for your Aunt. 


B 4 | ove. 


24 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Love. [ To Phil.] Pray have a little Patience, Ma- 
dam, and you'll ſee the Event. 

Viſc. Lady; I bleſs thoſe Stars that have directed 
me to ſo happy a Choice; therefore few Words are 
beſt. If you like me as well as I do like you, e'en 
ſend for a Parſon To Phil. 

Lady. Hold, Sir, ſure you miſtake ! 

Love. Now Now it works, | A/ide to Phil. 

Viſc. What ſay you, Lady? Shall we To Phil, 

Lady. I can hold no longer. [ A/tde, 
Pray, Sir, are not you the Viſcount Sans Terre? 

Viſc. Pretty Creature, I am. X 

Lady. And come with an Intention—— | 

Viſc. To make this Lady, your Aunt, happy in a 
Husband, it ſhe pleaſes. | 

Lady. I tell you, Sir, I am that Lady you ſpeak 
of; and that is, my Niece Philadelphia. 

Viſc. Ha, ha, ha; Your Niece, quotha | 
Why ſure you think to put ſome Trick upon me. 
This motherly grave Lady your Niece! 

No, No; I thank you, Madam, I am not to be 
perſwaded out of my Reaſon. 

Lady. He makes me almoſt mad. (Aide. 
I ſay again, that I am call'd the Lady Laycock ; _ 
And that pert Minx my Niece; who was left in 
Charge with me till ſhe be of Age. 

Viſc. *Sdhearr, tis impoſſible ! You look Twenty 
Years younger than that Lady you call your Niece. 

Lady. Oh, dear Sir! That indeed may well be: A 
great many do allow, I appear to be ſomething youn- 
ger than I altogether am. 

Viſc. How could I be ſo much miſtaken ! 
Sure, Madam, you but jeſt with me. 

Lady. Indeed, Sir, theſe Gentlemen know I ſpeak 
Truth. 

Can. Tis very true indeed, my Lord. 


22 


The Wanton Wife. a 5 | 


Viſc. Well, fince it happens fo, I like it the better; 
for to ſay Truth, I had fix'd my Eye on you at my 
firſt Entrance. | 
Ah! wou'd 'twere over once. 

Methinks I long to have thee in my Arms, 

Oh! How I would employ my Faculties, 

And ſurfeit with delight. 

What ſay you, Lady? Never ſtand to conſider on't, 
but ſend for a Parſon to ſay Grace, that I may fall to. 
Odds ſo, I'm very hungry Very ſharp ſer ; 

1 long to be doing. 

Lady. Pray, my Lord, walk in, and refreſh your 
ſelf after your Journey. I was unmannerly not to 
ask you before. | 
Prudence, Come hither. See that all things are in 
readineſs. Oh, Prudence! I am impatient to be alone 
with him. ; Exit Pro. 
My Lord, you will excuſe the Diſorder you have 
found me in. 

Viſc. Never trouble your ſelf about it. Join but 
your Forces with mine, and we'll beget a Race of 
People, that ſhall be immortal. A Race, that ſhall 
create a ſecond War with ove, and raiſe Olympus 
top equal with the Seat of him, that hurls the 
Thunder. | = | 

Lady. No more, my Lord. Pray walk in. 

Viſc. All your Commands are abſolute. 

(Bai N leading the Widow, who puſhes out 

hil. | 

Love. Was there ever ſuch a Piece of Fly-Fleſh ? 

Cun. The Rogue acted it to the Life, and came 
very ſeaſonably ro my Reſcue. 

Had he ſtaid a Moment longer, I had been forc'd to 
have given up the Ghoſt, | 

Love. That ever Nature ſhould ſuffer ſuch a Lump 
of Rubbiſh in the World for Men to ſtumble over. 


Cun, 


26 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Cun. Pox on her old mouldy Chops: 
She's for engroſſing all to her ſelt. 
How ſhe thruſt her Niece in before her! 
F1l in, and try co beckon her into the Garden, if 
you'll interpoſe, ſhou'd the Aunt miſs her, and fol- 
low us. | 

Love. *Sdeath ! Would'ſt have me run into the 
Lion's Den, juſt when 1 have ſcap'd his Paw 
No, I have hazarded too much already to venture 
more, I thank you. I now have better Game in 
A 5 
You know pretty Mrs. Brittle, Sir Peter Pride's 
Daughter? | 

Cun. What of her? | 

Love. Oh, 'tis the ſweeteſt little Creature! 
99 Fair, ſo Wirty, fo Kind, and fo Promifing ! 
Fm juſt now ſending this Letter, in order to appoint 
a Meeting with her. But her Husband is ſo jealous 
(as indeed I hope to give him Cauſe for't) his Eye 
js hardly ever oft her. I am thinking what way it 
can be deliver'd wichout Suſpicion. Let me fee—— 

| (Studies. 

Cun. VI take my Leave; for I find I interrupt your 
Meditations. | 

Love. Farewel, my Friend ; and may both our 
Wiſhes proſper. (Exit Cuningham. 
Fefrey. 


Jeff. Sir. 

Love. Can'ſt thou contrive to carry this Letter to a 
young Gentlewoman, and bring an Anſwer, without 
being ſuſpected? If thou doſt, ehre, thou ſhalt 
be well rewarded for. thy Pains. 

Jeff. Is ſhe Widow, Wife, or Maid, pray Sir? 

Love. Why doſt thou ask? . 

Jeff. For a private Reaſon I have. 


Enter Jeffrey. 


Love. 


— 


x 
„ 
] 
( 
1 


The Wanton Wife. . | 27 


Love. Well then, to ſatisfy thy Curiofity, Jeffrey, 
know ſhe's a Wife; a Young, a Handſome, and a 
Melting one! 

I am all Ecſtaſy, and impatient till J poſſeſs her. 
Good Jeffrey, look on the Superſcription, and about 
it With all Speed. 
 Zef. I dare not touch it: 
3 2 me with it. 

ove. Why ſo, good Feßrey? 

Jef. 1 ſay 1. do not — me. 

Love. Your Reaſon, Zeffrey ? 

Feff. I don't care to meddle in a Cauſe, where 
there's a Proceis of Cuckoldom going forward. 

Love. Prithee, why fo ? 

Fefg. Why, Sir, I'll tell you. You muſt know, 
Sir, 1 love Prudence, my Lady Laycochs Woman, and 
l believe there's no Love loſt between us; nor do I 
know how ſoon we may exchange our Perſons fer 
better and for worſe. Now, Sir, if I ſhould be the 
Inſtrument (by carrying this Letrer) of your making 
this honeſt} Man a Cuckold, who knows but, in return 
of ſuch a monſtrous Deed, it may be my own Caſe 
next; therefore, Sir, | don't care to meddle in't. 

Lowe. Give me the Letter again; I did but try thee. 
Thy Maſter, indeed, has often told me, how ſcrupu- 
lous thou wert about theſe Matters, but I ne'er be- 
liev'd it till now. Stick ro thy Principles, and be 
what thou deſerv'ſt, thou mayſt come to Good at laſt. 
J have no farther Service at preſent. Prithee leave 
me, I have Buſineſs of Moment. (Exit Jeffrey. 
I had been finely ſerv'd if I had ſent this conſcientious 
Rogue. What (hall Ido? The Viſcount brought an 
ignorant Country Fellow up with him, that won't 
be ſuſpeQed in the leaſt. *Tis well thought of; III 
entruſt him, and ſend it immediately. Soft 
Who comes here? — Oh! *cis the Husband. 


— — — — 


Enter 


28 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Enter Barnaby Brittle. 


Your Servant, Mr. Brittle; is the Lady Laycock at 
home, can you tel] ? 

Brit. Yes, yes, I believe ſhe is. 

Love. I have a little Buſineſs, and muſt needs ſpeak 
with her. Sir, your Servant. 

Britt. A little Buſineſs, quotha ! 
A fine Trade this doating od Widow drives; my 
Houſe is become as common for all Commers and 
Goers, as the Mall or Spring-Garden : But I ſhall put 
a ſtop to it ina little time, I believe. 


Enter Mrs: Brittle in haſte, dreſs'd very airy ; be 
flops ber. 


Britt. How now Whither away in ſuch haſte ? 

Mrs. Britt, I'm going abroad, Husband. Good 
bye. 
"Britt. Hold, hold, by your Leave, I'll know for 
what, and whither your ſweer Ladyſhip is going? 

Mrs. Britt. Why, to the Play, ſweet Husband. 

Brit. Hum! to the Play. 

Mrs. Britt. Well, Good bye, Hushand—=—— I 
ſhall be too late, and then there'll be ſuch crowding, 
J ſhan't get the firſt Row in the Box, for *tis a new 
Play; and I had as lief not go, as fir behind. 

(Is going. 

Britt. Hold, hold, pray ſtay, if you pleaſe. 

Mrs. Britt. Indeed but I can't. 

Britt. Indeed but you muſt not go, Wife. 

Mrs. Britt. Indeed, Husband, but I ſhall. 
Britt. IJ ſay again, you muſt not. 

Mrs. Britt. Muſt not! Who ſhall hinder me ? 

Britt. Why, that will J. 

Mrs. Britt. I ſay, No. 

Britt. 


2 ̃ ² 35 d e uw ws FE R3M  .. .. 


The Wanton Wife. 29. 


Britt. But I ſay, Yes. 

Mrs. Britt. Don't you pretend to't. 

Britt. Don't you provoke me, I ſay. Is this the 
Trade you always intend to drive? 

Mrs. Britt. Yes indeed is it. 

Britt. J ſay, No. 

Mrs. Britt. But I ſay, Yes. Do you think you 
ſhall keep me always ſtifling within Doors, where 
there's no body to be ſeen but your old fuſty ſelf? 
No, I'll to the Play, where there's all forts of Com- 
pany and Diverſion ; where the Actors repreſent all 
the Briskneſs and Gaiety of Life and Pleaſure ; where 
one is entertain'd with airy Beaux, and fine Gallants, 
which ogle, ſigh, and talk the prettieſt things in the 
World. Methinks *tis rare to hear a young brisk 
Fellow court a handſome young Laſs, and ſhe all the 
while making ſuch pretty dumb Signs: firſt turns aſide 
to ſee who obſerves, then ſpreads her Fan before her 
Face, heaves up her Breaſts, and fighs—— at which 
he {till ſwears he loves her above all the World 
and preſſes hard his Suit; tells her, what Force her 
Beauty, ber Wir, her Shape, her Mien, all join'd in 
one, are of. At which ſhe bluſhing curteſies low, 
and to her ſelf replies, What charming Words he 
ſpeaks ! his Perſon's Heavenly, and his Voice Divine, 
By your Leave, Husband, you make me ſtay long. 

| (ls going. 

Britt. Not in the leaſt—— there will be no great 
miſs of you, it you don't go. And now you talk of 
Gallants, bleſs us! What a Dreſs is there ! 
Do you think that fit for a Tradeſman's Wife? 

Mrs. Britt. No, but I think it fit for Sir 
Peter Pride's Daughter, ſuch as I am. I warrant 
you'd have me go abroad like one, thar ſells Butter 
and Eggs Or like one that cries, Come buy 
my dainty fine pickled Cucumbers : No, no, I'm re- 
folv'd ro dreſs—— put on all the Airs 1 can— go 

abroad 


30 The Amorons Widow: Or, 


abroad ſee and be ſeen rake my Fill of 
Pleaſure, and not be ſhut up in a Nunnery, to pine 
and figh, and walte my youthful Days in fruitleſs 
Wiſhes: No, I'm not ſo weary of my Life ver, tho? 
you do all you can to make me ſo. And I would 
have you to know, tho you have forc'd me to wed 
my ſelf with old Age and ill Humours, I am not wed- 
. ded to my Grave! 'ris time enough forty Years 
hence to think of that, and I have a great deal to do 
before that time comes; therefore I muſt; and I will 
g0 abroad. | 

Britt. Stir one Step if you dare (Spits in his Eiſi. 
If you go to that, Fll try who wears the Breeches, 
you or I. You (hall ſtay at home, and keep me 
Company; I'll tpoil your going to Plays, your Ap- 
pointments, and your Iatriegues——— I'll make you 
know, that I am your Hushand, and that you ſhall do 
what | pleaſe. Slife, What's here to do! What, 
have you forgot your Marriage Vows already? Pray, 
who am I? Am I not your Husband ? Are you not 
married to me ? 

Mrs. Britt. No You forc'd me; I never gave 
you my Conſent in Word or in Deed. Could you 
think I was in Love with Avarice, with Age and Im- 
potence ? 

Britt. Give me Patience! How ! How! 

Mrs. Britt. No, you baſely bought me of my Fa- 
ther and Mother. 

Britt, Would I could fell thee again. 

Mrs. Britt. Like a Slave you bought me, and ſo 
you intend to uſe me, were I Fool enough, but I'll ſee 
you hang'd firſt. | 

Britt. Why, what will your ſweet Ladyſhip do? I 
bought you, you ſay ? 

Mrs. Brut. Ves; Had you my Conſent ? or did 
you once ask it? Or if you had, my Affections were 
plac'd elſewhere, and ſo they (hall remain, 

3 on 


The WantonWife. 37 


In ſpight of all your Threats and boaſted Power! III 
not be us'd at this Rate! 

Britt, Good lack ! 

Mrs. Britt. I that am a Gentlewoman, deſcended 
from the worſhipful Family of the Pride's by the Fa- 
ther's fide | 

Britt. Ay, ſo *tis a fign by your Dreſs. Pride's, 
quotha! _ 

Mrs. Britt. And a Gentlewoman deſcended from 
the Honourable Family of the Laycock's by the Mo- 


ther's fide. (She Cries. 
And to be us'd at this Rate by an old naſty Shop- 
keeper ! | 


might have married a Merchant, and have kept my 
Glaſs Coach, my tall Footmen in fine Liveries, have 
gone abroad when I pleas'd without Controul, viſited 
Quality, nay, took Place of em at the Play-houſe, 
and met with ReſpeCt from the beſt ; and is it come 
to this? But I'll to my honourable Father and Mo- 
ther, and tell 'em all, who, I'm ſure, won't ſuffer 
their Daughter to be thus abus'd. (Cries ſtill. 
cannot, nor will not endure it any longer- (Exit. 
Britt, This *tis for a Tradeſman ro marry a Gen- 
tle woman. A Curſe on ſuch Gentility ! What ſhall 
I do? I ſhall be damnably plagu'd with her Father and 
Mother. Well, next Month I muſt take up in Bed- 
lam; a Judgment, which every Citizen deſerves, that 
marries above his Quality. (Exit. 


32 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


ACT Ill 
Sckxx, A Street before a Glaſs-Shop. 


Eꝛnter Btittle Solus. 


WI ! What a Plague 'cis to be married! 

I muſt incorporate with one above my Quali. 
ty roo, and not be content with ſomething in my 
own Sphere, like one that had a Mind to live in 
Peace and Quietneſs, but nothing would ſerve me 
but a Gentlewoman, altho I rook her with never a 
Tatter to her Back, forſooth; and now, I think, I'm 
fitted with a Vengeance. Would I were but fairly 
rid of her, and her Gentility once, the Devil ſhould 
rake all ſuch Gentility before I'd ever concern my ſelf 
with it again, Bur who have we here ? 


Enter Clodpole az out of Brittle's Houſe, looking about 
him as afraid to be ſeen. 


Clod. Huſh !—— Softly !—_— Mum No body 
fſees—— Ha, ha, ha—— No body ſees! Softly !— 
Ods my Lite, who's that — Mum! —— Not a 
Word. —— (ls ſtealing of, 

Britt. Friend, hiſt Friend Pray ſtay a lit- 
. tle; What Buſineſs might you have in that Houle ? 

Cod. Wou'd you know now? Softly !==- Not a 
Word. Ha, ha, ha, 'you underſtand me. 

Britt. But you muſt know | 

Clod. Yes, yes, I do know already, but am not 
ſuch a Fool to tell you. You ſhan'c get a Word out 
of me. You underſtand me. | 


Brut. 


The Wanton Wife. 93 

Britt. Yes, very well, but— 
Cod. Softly !—— not 2 Word. | 
Britt. IJ know that; but who was you to ſpeak 
with in that Houſe ? e 

Clod. Sotily !—— Can no body hear? For you 
muſt know, the old Cucko!d of that Houſe, they ſay, 
is damnably given to be jealous; I would not for 
ne'er ſo much he ſhould ſee me. 

Britt. No, no, T'll warrant you. 

Clod. You mult not ſay any thing 

Britt. No, no, not a Word. ; 

Clod. His Wite's a main pretty ſmirking Rogue, as 
a Man would wiſh to lay his Leg over. 
Softly! —— Is no body coming? 

Brut. Ti warrant thee———— Prithee go on. 

Cod. What? you want to know all, do you? But 
I' not truſt you. Mum! not a Word. You under- 
ſtand me. | | 

Britt. Yes, yes, I underſtand you well enough— 
but you may truſt me, I ſhan't ſay a Word. | 

Cod. Why luck now Ha, ha, ha, Wou'd 
you, would you ? Bur you ſhall get nothing out of 
me. | 
PII warrant you'd have me tell you now, that I 
brought a Letter to the Gentlewoman of that Houſe 

Britt. Hum | 

Cod. And that I deliver'd it to none but her ſelf— 
as I was order'd | 

Britt. So, 

Clod. You underſtand me ? 

Britt, Les, yes, perfectly well. 

Clod. And that I ſtay'd for an Anſwer 

Britt, Well, and I hope you got one? 

Cod. Mum ! not a Syllable! no body muſt know. 
If it ſhould come to the Knowledge of the Cuckold 
her Husband, *rwill ſpoil all. 

Britt, Oh never fear, 


Clod, 


34 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Clod. You'll ſay nothing of what I have told you? 

Britt. No, no, not a Word. 

Cod., For you muſt know, Mr. Lowery charg'd 
me, when he ſent me, to ſay never a Word. 

Britt. Is the Gentleman's Name Lovemore, ſay 

ou ? 
f Chhd. Why, do you know him? 

Britt. Oh, very well; a tall, proper, handſome 
Man, and always very generous. 

Clod. The ſame, the ſame. 

Britt. And lives juſt 

Cod. At the lower end of this Street on t'other fide 
of the way, over againſt the Golden Ball. 

I find you do know him. 

Britt. Know him! Why he's my very good Friend. 
A Pox of all ſuch Friendſhip. (Aſide. 

Cod. Odd, he's a fine Gentleman as ever I met 
with in all my Life. 

Brit. Ves, yes, he's a very fine Gentleman indeed. 
I wou'd the Devil had him. (A/tde. 

Clod. He gave me this Piece of Gold to carry a 
Letter for im, which I deliverd to the Gentlewo- 
man of that Houſe but now. 

Britt. Oh, he's a very civil Gentleman; I have 
heen long acquainted with him. 

Well, and what Anſwer did you get 
A very pleafing one, I'll warrant you. 

Clod. Softly, you muſt not tell a Syllable of this 
to the Husband, nor that ſhe'll fend my Maſter an 
Anſwer, as ſoon as ever ſhe can get the Cuckold out 
of the way. But no body muſt know. You under- 
ſtand me. 

Britt. Oh, Tl keep your Counſel, never fear. 

Clod. She bad me tell him, ſhe'd meet him this Eve: 
ning, if ſhe can. 

Brut. Ay. 


4 (Cod 


| The Wanton Wife. 35 


Cod. And that ſhe's very ſenſibly ob—ob—obliged 
to him, for his Kindneſs to her. 

Britt. Ay, no doubt on't. 

Clod. And takes it mighty kind of him. 

Britt. She does. | 

Cod. Odd, ſhe's a pretty Bit; and then there's a 
handſome Maid that waits upon her, and is Aſſiſtant 
to her in theſe Matters, one Dam—Damaris, I think 
they call her. 

Britt, Ay, like enough. 

Cod. And you muſt know I like her hugely. She 
gave me Two or Three ſuch loving Looks, that I am 
half perſuaded ſhe likes me. So that it my Maſter 
gets acquainted with the Miſtreſs, I intend to ſtrike 
in with her Maid. 

Britt. Oh, all but Reaſon. 

C/od. But no body mult know of it. 

You underſtand me. 

Well, good bye to you. My Maſter will wonder I 
ſtay ſo long. Be ſure you ſay nothing now. | 
You underſtand me. (Exit, 

Britt. Yes, yes, I do ſo; farewel. 

Well, Barnaby Brittle, now thou ſee'ſt what comes 
of marrying of a Gentlewoman. I believe thou wilt 
be married to ſomething elſe in a little time, if thou 
art not ſo already. (Points to bis Head, 


Enter Sir Peter Pride and Lady Pride. 


Sir Pet. You ſeem diſorder'd, Son-in-law. 
Britt. And I have Reaſon to be ſo, if ever any Man 
had. (Walks to and fro in a burry. 
Lady. Good lack! And why to (hort, Son-in-law ? 
Britt, I ſhall grow taller in a little time, Good 
Mother. in- law, it this Trade holds. (Points to his Head. 
Sir Peter. Explain your Meaning, Son in- law. 
Britt. Twill explain it ſelf ſhortly, (Walks up and 
down, | C 2 Lady 


36 The Amorous Widow : Or, 

Lady. What, is that Hat of yours nail'd on? Do 
ou know who we are? And the Reſpett due to 
Perſons of our Quality, good Son-in-law ? 

Britt. Ah! wou'd I did not; but now I know to 
my .Sorrow, fince you will have me ſpeak, good Mo- 
ther-in-law. 

Lady. Will you never leave that ſaucy Word, of 
calling me Mother-in-law ? 
1 Good Lord! Why what muſt I call you 
then ? . 
Lady. You ought to ſay, Madam and Sir, when 
you ſpeak to us; or when you ſpeak of us, you 
ſhovld ſay, Sir Peter, and her Ladyſhip : For tho' you 
have married our Daughter, yet there is a great deal 
of diſtinction betwixt you and Perſons of our Rank 
and Quality. | 

Sir Peter. Go to, it is enough for me to let him 
know his Duty, without your Inſtructions. Sure, I 
belt know my ſelf what to do. Son-in-law, you are 
an impudent Fellow to uſe us at this rate. How of- 
ten muſt we put vou in mind of your Duty and Re- 
ſpe&t, er you'll know it ? Hence-forward learn to 
behave your felt as you ought, or you ſhall hear on't 
in other fort of Terms. You muſt nor think becauſe 
you've married our Daughter, that we will be fatis- 
fied with ſuch indifterent Ceremonies and Duty you 
might have paid, had you married one equal with 
your ſelf; nor ought you indeed to ſay, your Wife, 
when you ſpeak of our Daughter. : 

Britt. Good lack Is not your Daughter my 
Wife? 

Sir Peter. She is. — But you ought not to call 
her ſo. 

Britt. I know that too well, now tis too late. Id 
give a thouſand Pounds ſhe were not my Wife. 

Sir Peter. At it again? I tell you, tho' you have 
married her, yet as ſhe is our Daughter, you muſt not 
treat her after that familiar way. Britt 


The Wanton Wife. 

Britt. Vou make me mad 
my Wife? 

Sir Peter. I tell you, tho* ſhe be your Wife, you 
muſt not call her ſo. When you ſpeak of her, as be- 
ing our Daughter, you muſt ſay, Madam. 

Britt. Well, Madam, then fince it muſt be Madam, 

I did not care if ſhe were a Dutcheſs, fo I were bur 
fairly rid of her. 

Here's ſuch a ſtir about your Gentility, and your Ho- 
nour : Bur I believe if I bad not married your Daugh- 
ter, and with my good Money redeem'd your Eſtate, 
your Gentility had been left in the Mud for all 
your great Families, and your nice Honour. 


Is not my Wiſe 


Sir Peter. Then do you think it no Honour to be 


ally'd to the Worſhipful Family of the Pride's. 
Lady. And to the Honourable Family of the Lay- 
cock's £ Go, Clown, *Tis a Shame our Daughter 
ſhould be wedded to ſuch a Brute. We have been 
told at what a rate you treat her. What is the Rea- 
fon of it, Son-in-law ? 
Britt. Why, you ſhall know, good Mother. in law. 
Lady. Again at that affronting way 
How often have you been told to ſay, Madam? 
Britt, Well, Madam, then: I always forget theſe: 


fine Words. But, Madam, if you wou'd pleaſe, Ma. 


dam, to hear me ſpeak, you ſhall know, Madam, 
whether I have not Cauſe to with, I never had ſeen my 
Wi—— your Daughter, Madam, it I muſt call her 
nothing elſe. 

Sir Peter. Well, Sir, proceed. 

Britt. Why, in the firſt Place, I am in a fair way 
to be made a Cuckold, if I am nor one already. 

Sir Peter. How, Son- in law? Have a Care what 
you ſay. | 

Britt. Believe me, what I fay, I can mike appear. 

Sir Peter. Do it then preſently. | 


C 3 Britt, 


37 


0. TT nr 2 


38 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Britt. Why, ſhe has juſt now receiv'd a Letter from 
her Gallant, and made an Appointment to meet him 
this Evening; and judge how ſmall a time a Pair of 

Horns are a grafting. | 

Sir Peter. How came you to know this, Son-in- 

wW ? | 

Britt, Why, juſt now - I caught the Fellow, 
that brought her the Letter, coming out of my Houſe, 
and not knowing who I was, I got out of him all the 
Bufineſs ; and that his Maſter, Mr. Lovemore——— 

Sir Peter. Is that the Gentleman's Name? 

Britt. Yes, ſo his Man told me. I have often ſeen 
him taking a View about my Houſe, and looking up 
to the Windows; and 'tis plain what his Deſigns 
were. | 

Lady. If this be true, Pl tear her Eyes out. 

Sir Peter. Nay, if ir be, this good Sword (never 

et drawn in vain) ſhall do you Right. 

here is ſhe, Son-in-law. | 

Britt. Within, Fil warrant, ftudying what Excuſe 
to make, to get abtoad, and mcet her Gallant, 

Lady. I'll call her to anſwer for her felt. 

Be ſure you wrong her not, Son-in-law. (Exit Lady. 

Britt. Nay, nay, I make no doubt but ſhe is ro 
be believ'd before me ; and ſhe ne'er wants Cunning 
to bring her ſelf off, I'll ſay that for her, tho' the 
Caſe be ncer ſo plain. : 

Sir Peter. By this good Light, if ſhe dares be falle 
to her Marriage Vows, ſhe dies; and that baſe Rifler 
of her Fame ſhall bear her Company, 

Britt. Oh! Here he comes; that Spoiler of my 
Honour; that's he. ä 


Enter Lovemore. Sir Peter meets him. They ſtare 
ä each other 7th Face. 


Sir Peter. Do you know who I am, Sir? 
Love. I don't well remember J ever had much Ac- 
qudintance with you. a Sir 


by 


The Wanton Wife. +. * 


Sir Peter. I am call'd Sir Peter Pride. 

Love, It may be ſo: I've heard of you, Sir. 

Sir Peter. My Family, Sir, has ſtood theſe many 
Years with unblemiſh'd Fame and Honour. 

Love. Very likely, Sir. 

Sir Peter. How far you have endeavour'd to Rain 
that ſpotleſs Fame, be judge your ſelf. 

Love. Pray, Sir, explain this Riddle. 

Sir Peter. I have a Daughter young, fair, well- bred, 
has Senſe; ſhe is indeed the Wonder of her Sex, and 
this Man, whom you ſee here, has the Honour to 
be married to her. 

Britt. Ah! *Tis an Honour, that I cou'd have ſpar'd. 

(A/. » 

Sir Peter. Now, Sir, I'm told, that you endea 
to corrupt her Honour, and defile her Marriage: 'd. 
Sir, I have had the Honour to command abroad, and 
with Succeſs, both to my King and my Country — 
As have alſo the Chief Part of all our great Race ; 
even from William the Conqueror, to this preſent 
Reign, have our unqueſtiond Glories ſtood a Pattern 
to our yet riſing Fame: And he who dares preſume 
to rob us of that precious Jewel, Honour, muſt not 
think to ſcape unpuniſh'd, tho' with the Hazard o'th* 
laſt Drop of Blood, that is left, to waſh off the Stain. 
My a hrs Honour, Sir, is as dear to me, as 


this vital Air, by which I breath and live, 


L ove. Pray Sir, who told you this? ; 

Sir Peter. Believe me, Sir, whateer I ſay, I can 
quote my Author for it, 
Love. Then who-ever told you is a Raſcal ; and 
were he here, I'd ram the Lie down his Throat, or 
make him eat a Piece of my Sword. 

Sir Peter, Why he told me This Man 
Her Husbaud here juſtified it to my "ep and ſaid he 
had Proof. 


4 Love. 


40 The Amorous Widow : o, 


Love. How, Sir! Did you frame this abominable 
Falſhood ? *Tis well you have the Honour to be al- 
ly'd to this worthy Knight, Sir Peter Pride, here; or 
you ſhould know what it is to father ſach a Lie upon 
2 Man of my Reputation. 


Sir Peter. Oh! Here comes my Daughter. | 
Enter Lady Pride, Mrs. Brittle, and Damaris. 


Love, Did you, Madam, tell your Husband a 
ſtrange Story, that I ſhould make Love-to you, and 
endeavour'd to corrupt your Honour ? 

Mrs. Britt, I tell him! Why, when did you make 
Love to me, Sir ? I aſſure you, had you let me know 

your Paſſion, it ſhou'd not have gone unrewarded. 


O 
Pray, next time you fend, let it be one that knows 
how to take more Care. However, you have no 
great Reaſon to deſpair; for fince he complains with- 
out any manner of Reaſon, I am reſolv'd he ſhall 
have Cauſe. Therefore if you do love me, Sir, pray 
let me know it, and I do aſſure you, you ſhall not 
want Encouragement. He ſhall not uſe me at this 
rate for nothing. | 

Love. Madam, believe me, tis all a Riddle to me; 
for, till this Hour, I never heard any thing mention'd 
like it: I am an abſolute Stranger to ir. 

Lady. Do you hear that, you Clown? Are you 
not aſham'd ro abuſe a Gentlewoman continually, 
without any Cauſe ? 

Sir Peter. What is the Meaning of this, Son-in- 
law ? 3 | | 

Britt. Pray, do but hear me. 

Sir Peter. Troth, Son-in-law, you are a very im-. 
padent Fellow. | 
Britt. Hear me but ſpeak ? 

Sir Peter. You ſhall not ſpeak. 

We have heard too much already: 
Mrs. 


The Wanton Wife. 41 
Mrs. Britt. | am ſure Damaris knows, I never have 
any body comes near me, but ſuch as himſelf; nor 
_ receiv d any Meſlage, either by Letter, or other- 
wiſe | 5 
I never committed any Crime againſt him, that I know 
of, unleſs fitting by my ſelf all Day, and poring 
over two or three good Books be an Ottence. Speak 
Damaris, did I ever give him any Cauſe for theſe Suſ- 
picions, and this Uſage ? Thou know'ſt all I ſay or do. 
Damaris. Madam, I know no Reaſon; nor can I 
bear to ſee the Hardſhip you endure! Like a barba- 
rous Man as he is To abuſe ſo good a Lady! fo 
Virtuous, ſo Innocent, and ſo Pious a Lady! I am 
ſure it makes me weep to think ont. I am 
afraid he'll break her Heart in a little time, if. 
(Weeps. 
Britt. Hold your Tongue, you Jade, or Ill make 
you feel my double Fiſt. You are nor a Gentle- 
woman ; 
I may do what I pleaſe with you. 
Mrs. Britt. Oh, my dear Father! (Cries. 
I am not able to endure this any longer. 
Never was any Woman abus'd as I am. 
I beg you will do me Juſtice, tor I can bear it no 
longer. (Exit crying. 
Lady. Damaris, let's follow her, and endeavour to 
comfort her. Oh, thou Clown, to uſe a Gentlewoman 
with ſo much Cruelty! | 
Dam. I fear he'll be the Death of her at one time 
or another. (Exeunt Lady Pride and Damatis. 
Sir Peter. What do you think of all this, Sir ? 
Are not you a very pretty Fellow ? | 
Come hither, Son-in-law, ask this Gentleman Pardon, 
tor the Affront you have put upon him in belying of 
him, 
Britt. How! ask his Pardon, that would have made 
me a Cuckold ? 


Love 
8 


3 


42 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Love. Sir Peter, pray—— 

Sir Peter. I ſay no more Words: He has wrong'd 
a Gentleman; and the leaſt he can do, is begging 
Pardon. . 

Britt. Tis very well! He offends, and I muſt ask 
Pardon. | 

Sir Peter. No matter for that, you hear he denies 
it; and 'tis enough, if a Gentleman unſays what he 
has ſaid. 

Britt. So that if I catch him making me a Cuc- 
kold, and he denies it, I muſt not believe it, becauſe 
a Gentleman faid it. 

Sir Peter. I ſay, you ſhall ask Pardon: Therefore 
no more Words, but do't. 

Britt. 1 ſhall run mad. 

Well, what muſt I do? 

Sir Peter. Come hither : Take your Hat off. 
Kneel down, and ſay after me. | 

Britt. Well, fince it muſt be ſfo—— (Kneels. 
This 'tis to be marry'd to a Gentlewoman, forſooth. 
Sir Peter. Sir, I ask your Pardon. 

Brit. Sir, I ask your Pardon. (In the ſame Tone. 
Sir Peter. For the Affront I have put upon you. 
Britt. For the Affront I have put upon you. 

Sir Peter. By falſly accuſing you 

Britt, How] falſely accufing him 

Sir Peter. I ſay no more Words. Say after me. 
Britt. Say after me. 
Sir Peter. Accuſing you, of having a Deſign to 
. corrupt my Wite's Honour. EE 

Britt. Accuſing you of Truth 
Defign to corrupt my Wife's Honour. 

Sir Peter. For which, knowing my ſelf in thc 
wrong, I do ask your Pardon, 

Britt. For which, knowing my ſelf not in the 
wrong, I'm forc'd to ask your Pardon. 


f 


And having a 


Lo U 25 


The Wanton Wife. | 43 


Love. Well, Sir, upon Sir Peter Pride's Account. 
I am content to paſs it by this time: But let me 
hear no more Complaints. (Brittle 7:/es, and runs off. 
Sir Peter. Sir, now all is well, I humbly take my 
Leave. (Exit Sir Peter. 
Love. Was there ever ſuch a lucky Rogue as I? 
For her to encourage me to make Love to her before 
her Husband's Face ! 
Nay, and before her Father and Mother too! 
Oh, I am all on Fire cill I have her in my Arms! 
Bur ſoft! who comes here? 


Enter Prudence, 


Well, my little Scout, what News ? How fares my 
Friend? Is Philadelphia kind? Where's thy Lady? 
Pru. Where- e er her Perſon is, I'm ſure her beſt 
Thoughts are ſtill employ'd on you. And however 
ſhe may pretend a Paſſion for Mr. Cuningbam, ſhe 
loves none but you. Pray, Sir, do but try her. 
Love. Oh racking Thought! I'd rather make Love 
to a Convocation of Cats at a Witch's Up-fitting, 
than but ſpeak to her. Where's my Friend > Oh! 
here he comes, and his fair Conſort. 


Enter Cuningham and Philadelphia. 


Cen. Be not ſo cruel to ſay, you want the Power: 
It we neglect this Opportunity, which kindly pre- 
ſents it ſelf, the next perhaps may not be ours. 

Phil. Would you then have me diſpoſe of my ſelf 
without my Aunt's Conſent? Do not urge me to 
that, ſince I have promiſed not ro wed without it. 

Cun. I ask not her Conſent, but yours: Grant me 
but that, and leave the reſt to Time and Chance. 

Pru. Madam, how can you deny him that, ſince I 
knov you love him? | 2 
PLA 


44 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Cun. Ha! Oh, the charming Sound 
And will you not conſent to make me happy ? 
Or do you not believe I love you ? 
By all thoſe Fires that burn within my Soul, I 
{wear 
Pru. Hold ! Hold, Sir! You have ſworn enough 
already to corrupt a whole Nunnery of Sighing, 
Praying and Wiſhing young Votaries. Why don't you 
ive him your Hand, fince he has your Heart, I be- 
ieve you love to hear him ſwear and Give him 
your Hand, or, Ill diſcover all. 
Phil. Well, there tis then; (Gives ber Hand to 
Cuningham. 
But I promiſe nothing elſe. I fear I have given too 
much already, 
Cun. Oh, never! never! Tl pay thee back ſo vaſt 
a ſtore of Love and Conſtancy, as ſhall weary thee 


with ſtill — 
Pru. Madam, Madam, your Aunt's behind you. 


, Enter Widow, 


Phil. Ha! My Aunt ! What ſhall I do? 


Cun. Fear nothing, Madam, but give me your 


Hand. 


Fll bring all of. (Pretends to rell ber Fortune. 


This Line ſeems to Point out ſome unexpected Croſs: 
And this Line thwarting the Line of Lite, fignifies a 
retir'd Life; and this joining with it, ſhews you'll 
be in Danger of ending the latter parr of your Days 
in a Nunnery. (Widow behind them. 

Widow. How, Mr. Cuningban ! Can you tell For- 
tunes ? | 

Cun. I underſtand a little Palmiſtry, Madam, and 
Fan give a Gheſs at Phyſhognomy, 

Widow. Tis very well. 
When I enter'd firſt, I thought you had been 1 

” ov 


The Wanton W ife. 45 


Love to my Neice : I am glad to find it * 
But where's the Viſcount ? 
Pry. In the next Room, Madam. 
Love. Ill wait upon him: I'd feign try has 
his Infide be anſwerable to his outward Appearance. 
(Is going. 
Cun. Nay, prithee ſtay I can aſſure you, he is 
not to be equall'd either in Perſon or Diſcourſe. 
Pru. He is indeed a fine proper Man, as one would 
wiſh to ſee. 
Widow, Why, _ his Lordſhip has Parts. 
Phil. You and Prudence go find him out, and 
bear him Company awhile , EIn wait on him imme- 
diately, tell him. You, Sir, may go with em, if 
you pleaſe. (To Lovemore. 
Love. Madam, moſt willingly. 
Cun, *Sdeath ! You won't leave me? ( Aſide to 
Lovemore. 
Love. Faith, but I will; doſt think PII ſtay to en- 
dure a ſecond Hell? For if there be one upon Earth, 
*ris being left alone with her. 
Madam, Your Ladyſhip ſhall ever command me. (To 


the Widow. 
Come, Lady, if you pleaſe, the Honour of your fair 
Hand. (Jo Phil. 


Exit with Phil. and Pru. 

Can. What will become of me now? (Aſide. 
Widow. Well, Mr. Cuningham, I have long' d for ſome 
time to be alone with you, that I might ſpeak more 
freely to you. 

Cun. Madam, *tis too great an Honour. 

Widow, I wonder, Sir, you never think of Mar- 
rying ? 

Can. Madam, as yet I dare not think on't. 

Widow. Oh, dear Sir! Pray, why ſo? 

Cun. Becauſe I have not well conkider'd i it; and I 
have been told, tis a dangerous Undertaking, without 
having well chought betore-hand, - Widow, 


46 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Widow. Pray, Sir, why ſhould you think ſo? 

Tl vow *ris an odd Thought, Sir, for one of your Un- 
derſtanding : Why, Sir, I'll tell you. 

I have had Three Husbands, and yet I have no great 
Reaſon to complain: Tho' in my laſt Husband's 
time, I had not altogether that real Satisfaction, asl 
had with the other Two; for to deal freely with you, 
Sir, my Husband Sir Oliver Laycock, though he was 
a very well-bred Man, yet he had his Humours ſome- 
times, and would be a little given to Jealouſy, ſo 
that 1 ſeldom led a quiet Hour when the Fit was 
upon him. But in my firſt Husband's Days, ſure 
never Woman liv'd ſo happy! I would not a-been 
unmarried to have had all the Riches of the Earth 
laid at my Feet: But when I married with Sir Oliver, 
and had once ſeen his Temper, nothing I had in the 
World but what I would æ given to a been free a- 
gain; and indeed in my Paſſion I often vow'd never 
(if pleaſe Heav'n Sir Oliver died) to marry any more. 

Cun. *Twas raſhly done. 

But no doubt, were there that Man fitting to merit 
your Favour, and equally deſerving your Perſon and 
your Eſtate, and one whom your Ladyſhip could like, 
you might perhaps be perſuaded to break your Vow, 
and venture once again. 

Widow. I'll ſwear I hardly think it, and yet one 
don't know how one may be tempted ; tho! it I were 
to be perſuaded, (and I will not forſwear any thing) 
I know not any one, that can ſo ſoon perſuade me to it 
as you, Mr. Cuningbam. 

(un. Death and the Devil! What have I brought 
upon my felt! f | ( Aftde. 
Oh Madam ! You make me bluſh, 
But Madam! How cou'd you with Honour put off 
the Viſcount, who you know loves you, and is come 
on purpoſe to marry you ? 


id. 


3 * 
* 


nom, gy ©, A — — — FF — 


c 2 2 a 2 GG” Ma we wy (5 = 


wie. By 


The Wanton Wife. 47 


id. Why, I intend him for my Niece you muſt 
know, who no doubt will be much better pleagd 
with the Change. For, to ſay Truth, Mr. Cuningbam, 
I have always had more, than a common Eſteem for 
you, and for your Behaviour; and have long fince 
reſolv'd, that if I do alter my Condition, you are the 
Man alone I have plac'd my Thoughts upon. 

Cun. You make me bluſh, Madam. 

Wou'd I were a League under-ground, or in any Hell 


but this. . (Afade. 
You cannot ſure. (To ber. 


id. I vow *tis true, and yet. 

Cn. Hear me but ſpeak, Madam? 

IWid. *Tis odd, that Love ſhou'd over-power Peo- 
ple at fo ſtrange a rate. | 

Can. But I ſhould be unjuſt to my Friend, who L 
know loves you dearer, than his Life. 

Vid. Oh dear! Who's that I beſeech you, Sir? 

Cun. Mr. Lovemore, Madam. 

Widow, Mr. Lovemore ! I'll ſwear I don't believe 
it, | 
Cun. Oh Madam! tis but too true, as will appear 
I'm afraid, when he knows you place your Aﬀections 
on any other Man, 

Midow. T'll vow you much ſurprize me, Mr. Ca- 
ningbam; but how came you to know it? 

Cun. Oft has he begg'd me to bear him Company . 
in ſome lonely Place, where he wou'd figh, and tell 
ſuch things of his diſtreſſed Paſſion, as wou'd have 
mov'd the moſt obdurate Heart; and when I ask'd 
him, why he did not acquaint your Ladyſhip with 
his Love, he would figh, with Arms a - croſs, as it 
his Heart woyld force its way through his Breaſt, and 
cry, Oh that's my Grief, my Friend, I cannot 
dare not tell her! for ſhould I attempt it once, and 
meet her ſcorn, (for oh! thou know'ſt her Vow) I 
ſhou'd be tor ever loſt, 1 

Then 


% 


48 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Then ran o'er a thouſand Tales of Love, ſo ſoft, fo 
moving, and how he priz'd you, that cannot be ex- 
preſs'd by any, except one, who loves like him. 
Widow. Truly, Sir, if it be fo——— 
Cun. If it be ſo! were your Ladyſhip to obſerve 
his diſtracted Throes, you'd pity him. 
Widow. But why {hould he not declate it to me? 
(un. That's what J tell him, Madam; 
Urging that your Ladyſhip=—— But mum! who 
have we here ? 


Euter Viſcount, Philadelphia and Prudence. 


Viſc. Ha! Whiſpering ! And ſo cloſe ! 
I like it not. 

Widow, The Viſcount ! this is unlucky, 

He looks diſturb'd ! Good Sir, ſome other time we'll 
end this Diſcourſe. (to Cuningham. 

Viſc. Ha! What are you, Sir? that thus dares to 
encroach upon my. Territories, and invade my Right? 

Widow. Nay, pray my Lord, be not diſpleas'd. 
This Gentleman, you muſt know, has a Law ſuir de- 
pending, and is come to entreat a Line of Commenda- 
rion from me to "ye Lawyer. 

Viſc. Enough; I do believe all you can ſay. Ah! 
thoſe Eyes ot yours! What Looks are there! they 
enflame my very Soul. 

a Il idow. Ah, Prudence, how I long to be alone with 
him. | 

Viſc. Tam impatient of this Delay, when ſhall we 
be married ? | 

Widow. Pray moderate your Paſſion, Sir. 

Viſc. Whar, you are afraid of that melancholy 
Gentleman, that ſtands fo filently there. 

Widow. Speak ſoftly, I am afraid he hears you, 
ir. a . 

Viſc. What care I if he does, 

| 4 Enter 


The Wanton Wife. 49 
Enter a Sorin, 


Serv. My Lord, the Dancers you ſpoke for, wait 
without. | 
Viſc. Let em enter. Will you pleaſe to fir, La- 


dies ? ALS 

A DANCE. 
\ Widow. Prudence, go tell Mr. Lovemore, I'd ſ peak 
with him this Evening. (Exit Prudence. 


Phil. — you may take a Turn in the Garden. And, 
Sir, if you think it no Trouble, you may bear her 
Company. | (Jo Cuningham. 

Cun. Madam, moſt willingly. (Exit with Phil. 

Widow. Why are you ſo melancholy, my Lord ? 

Vifc. Nothing that's worth the naming. But if 
you'll walk into the next Room, I'll tell you. 

Widow, My Lord, you are a Man of Honout, and 
| dare truſt my ſelf with you. 

Viſc. Madam, if I deſerve it not, may you always 
keep a Whip and a Bell, to ſcourge me from you like 
2 Cur. * 


ACT IV. 


Enter Clod pole and Damaris: He gives ber a Letter, 


8 ys are a fine Spark, are you not, to diſco- 
ver all the Buſineſs, and let it come to 
my Maſter's Hearing ? | 

Cod. Why ay, that's true, as you ſay ; but who 
wou'd have thought that he could have known it! 
But now to our on Buſineſs; Damaris—— Hot 


$0 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Doſt thou not love me, Damaris? 
Thou know'lt I love thee with all my Heart. 
Good lack! How it beats !— Odd, you may hear it 
thump all over the Houſe. 
Damaris How can'ſt thou be ſo hard-hearted ? 
Dam. P(lhaw! Prithee leave fooling. 
Clod. One Kiſs, Damaris, to revive me. 


0 (Kiſſes ber. 

Dam. Pray, Clodpole, be civil. 

Cod. Damaris. —— Canlt thou not ſpare a little 
Bit afore-hand ? 

Dam. Of what, Fool? 

Cod. Why, of—— Odd, you know well enough, 
What, I need not name it to thee. 

Dam. I know nothing of the Matter. 

Cod. Ay, but you do. Why, 1 ask but a little 
tiney, tiney Bir. Do, prithee now do. 

Dam. II ſee you at the Devil firſt. 

C!od. Do, Damaris— Spare but a Bit now ; and 
bate me as much on the Wedding- Night. 

Dam. No, I thank you, good Clodpole : I have too 
often been ſnapt that way already. ( A/ade. 
But ſee— yonder comes my Lady and my Maſter — 
Step with me into the next Room, he muſt not ſee you. 

C/od. Ay, any where, any where : Quickly, good 


Damaris. (Exit. 


Enter Barnaby Brittle and Mrs. Brittle. 


Britt. I tell you again, that Marriage is a very 
ſacred Thing, and ought not to be profand at this 
Rare. | 
Mrs. Britt. What do you tell me of Marriage, l 
have other things to mind. 

Britt. Truly, I do believe as much; that's the 
trueſt Word you ever ſpoke : But I think you ought 
to mind what I ſay. Am U not your Husband ? And 

+ ar? 


C9 


> QT 1 0 


The Wanton Wife. 51 


are not you bound in Duty by that Tye, to be obedient 
and juſt in all your Ways? | 


Enter Lovemore on the other ſide bowing. She ſees 
him, and Curteſies to bim. 


What's that for? What, do you banter me? 

Mrs. Britt. Keep your InſtruQions for thoſe that 
want 'em, my Thoughts are other ways employ'd. 

(Che Curteſies, Lovemore bows. Brittle ſees him 

not, and thinks ſhe does it in ſcorn to him. © 

Britt. What, you are praQtifing your Airs againſt 
you meet your Gallant, are you? And trying how to 
behave your ſelf to him? But I ſhall ſpoil your De- 
fign, I ſhall: (He Bows, ſhe Curteſies again. 
Leave off your Tricks with a Vengeance, and mind 
what I ſay to you. (Lovemore keeps Botoing to her. 
Again, don't provoke me; I ſay, don't; if you do, 
you may chance to repent it. I ſay, that Mar- 
8e | | 

Mrs. Britt, I know it, Dear; you need ſay no 
more. a 

(She takes Brittle round the Neck, and beckons 

Lovemore, who comes and kiſſes ber Hand over 

her Husband's Shoulders all the while. 
You know I love you dearly, by this I do. (Kiſſes bim. 


Why will you not be fatisfied? Had I the World to 
give, it cou'd not make me more happy than this 


Minute. (Lovemore ſtil! kiſſes ber Hand; 
Britt. Ah diſſembling Crocodile? 
What, now you think to wheedle me. 

Mrs. Britt. Be fatisfied with this: Hence forward, 
if you deſerve it, I give you my Heart for ever, 
which, till this Minute, I did not think to do. 

(She ſhouts to Lovettiote; 

Britt. Ah, would twere in your Powet to keep four 


ord: | 
D 2 Me, 


52 The Anitbae Widow : Or, 


Mrs. Britt. Indeed I will, let that content you , 
and learn to merit that rich Jewel, which this Mo- 
ment I put within your Power. | 

(Beckons Lovemore, who bows, and Exit. 

Britt. If thon would'ſt be thus kind always, how 
happy ſhould I be! But that's impoſſible! Would 
you but rhink ſometimes upon the Vow you made in 
Church, that ſolemn Vow of Marriage, twould put 
you in Mind of your Duty. 

Mrs. Britt. How can I think of any thing, when 
you will not give me leave ſo much as to peep abroad 
for Ait? Doyou think a Woman can ever be in a good 
Humour, that is lock'd up, and kept from what ſhe 
likes? Bur I'm reſfolv'd to bear it no longer. 

(She walks backward and forward. 

Britt. Good lack! What's your Mind ching'd al- 
ready? I thought *twas too good to laſt long. 

Mrs, Britt. But hence- forward you ſhan't think to 
make a Fool of me at this rate. I'll find a way to 
get out, for all your Spies; and then look to't— Tl 
uſe you as you deſerve. — 

Britt. Tempt me no farther, I beſeech you; if you 
do, I ſhall uſe you as you deſerve. Patience! and I 
have need enough of it at this time. 

Mrs. Britt. I'm reſolv'd to encourage every Man, 
that makes Love to me. Il kiſs and be wanton, ſince 
you provoke me to'r. Love, and be belov'd 
and not be ſubje& to the naſty Humours of an old 
Jealous—— I can't find a Name bad enough for thee. 

(He ſpits in bis Hand. 

Britt, Odd, I've a great Mind to ſpoil that hand- 
ſome Face. The Devil tempts me ſtrangely : I muſt 
be gone 3 for if I ſtay, I ſhall certainly be provok'd 
to do her a Miſchief, (Runs off 


4 Enter 


ys yas 


1; 


W 
of 


Bu 


The Wanton Wife. 53 


Enter Damatis with a Letter. 


Dam. I waited till my Maſter was gone, to deliver 
you this Letter; Madam, Mr. Lovemore's Man is 
within, and waits for an Anſwer, 

Mrs. Britt. Give it me, Damaris, quickly. 

Dam. I need nat bid you read it, fince you know 


from whom it comes. 
Mrs. Britt. Oh! *tis extremely pretty, Damarit. 
Fil in, and write an Anſwer preſently. (Exit. 


Dam. So ſhe has ſnapt the Bait at the firſt Angling, 
how ſhe'll ger clear of the Hook, I know not. Ha 


he's here himſelf ! 
Enter Lovemore and Clodpole. 


Love. Pretty Mrs. Damaris, I'm glad to ſee you. 
Is your Lady within? 
Dam. Yes, Sir, writing an Anſwer to your Letter, 
I ſuppoſe. You ſee, I deliver it with Care. 
Love. Oh, I underſtand you; there's for thy Pains. 
(Gives ber Money, ſhe puts ber Hand bebind ber, 
and takes it. 
Dam. Oh, dear Sir, by no means. Burt fince you 
will have it ſo, pray command me. 
Love. Can'ſt thou contrive to let me ſpeak with 
thy Miſtreſs ? 

Dam. It you pleaſe, Sir, I'll ſhew you to her. 

Love: Thou wilt oblige me for ever. 

(Exit Love. and Dam. 

Cod. Hiſt! Damaris /—— Odd, I ſhall have a rare 
Wife of her, if ſhe gets Money ſo faſt. Here's a piece 
of Gold got without the leaſt Trouble, as they ſay. 
But ſoftly '—— Who have we here ? 


D 3 Enter 


54 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Enter Brittle. 


Oh! are you there, Mr. Babb/zr 9 You are a pretty 
Fellow indeed ; you have made fine Work ! You can- 
not be told a Secrer, but you mult tell rhe Husband 
preſently. You underſtand me. 

Britt. Who, I tell the Husband, Friend! 

Clod. Ves, you; but I'll ſee you hang'd before you 
ſhall get any ching more out of me. You have made 
fine Work! All's diſcover'd !—— The Cuckold, her 
Husband, knows all the Bufineſs. 

Britt. Well, but 

Cod. You may as well hold your Tongue, for you 
ſhan't get a Word out of me. 

No, no, I have found you out, Pfaith. 

Britt, This Fellow may be uſeful to affirm it to 

her Father and Mother. I'll try to bribe him. (A/ide. 
(Pats bis Hand in bis Pocket to give him Money. 
Why look you, Friend, I'm ſorry this Matter i. 

Clod. Mum! You underſtand me. 

I know what you'd fay now, bur *rwill not do. You'd 
have me to tell you what I know, but Mum !-—— 
Softly ! Not a Word. I'll warrant, you'd have 
me tell you what Anſwer ſhe gave to the Letter. 

Britt. No, no, Friend ; but 

Clod. Softly — You ſhall get nothing out of 
me. You think III tell you now, that the Wife pro. 
mis'd to meet him, and that they are together now 
in that Room; but I'm not ſuch a Fool. No, no, 
you'll tell rhe Husband again; you cannot be ſecret, 
and ſo good bye to you. You ſhall get nothing our 
of me. You underftand me. (Exit. 

Britt. I'm ſorry I can't make that uſe of him as! 
intended; bur however, he has diſcover'd ſomething 
to me, chat may do as well. He ſaid her Gallant is 
with her now ; I'll liſten. (Goes 10 the 05 

N a 


The anton Nife. 55 


Oh Sadneſs ! *is but too true. Here's fine Doings. 


But T1 ſend for her Parents. Now they ſhall ſee 


who's in the wrong, and who's in the right. She 


can't ſcape me now, unleſs the Devil aſſiſt her; and 


ſee where they come in a lucky Hour. 
Enter Sir Peter Pride and Lady P. 


Father - in- law, you're welcome; and you, Madam- 
I'm glad you are come, I was juſt going to ſend. for 
ou. 
e Sir Peter. Why, what's the Matter, Son-in-law ? 
i Britt. Now you ſee what a fine Daughter you 
ave. | 
Sir Peter. What! more Complaints! What is the 
Reaſon of all this ? 
Britt, Do but hear me, and you ſhall know. 
Here has been her Gallant, and 
Sir Peter. Son-in-law, I'll not believe it. Will 
you never leave this fooling? We'll hear no more. 
Britt. No, no; I knew you wou'd never believe a 
Word I ſay; but ſhe can be credited, becauſe ſhe's a 
Gentlewoman, forſooth. Now yor ſhall ſee what a 
Gentlewoman J have got for a Wife. I have her faſt 


now, faſt in that Room with her Gallant, and that I 


hope will convince you. 

Lady. Tis falſe, thou baſe Villain. I know ſhe 
ſcorns to do ſo baſe a thing. 

Britt, Pray now don't believe me, but walk in: If 
you find it not true, never mind any thing 1 ſay, as 
long as I live. 

Sir Peter, Lead, Son- in law. If I find em together, 


by this good Sword they both ſhall die. 


Lady. But if tis not ſo, which 1 do believe tis 


only your Jealouſy again, look to your ſelf, Son in- 


law, I'Il ſuffer theſe Affronts no longer. 


D 4 Britt. 


56 The Anorous Widow : Or, 
Britt. If they are not there now, I am a very 


Villain. 
Come along Softly —— ( They all go in; 


SCENE Changes to a Chamber, and diſco- 


vers Lovemore, Mrs. Brittle, and 
Damaris. 


Love. You queſtion your own Power, when you 
miſtruſt cy Honour, Madam. Such Charms can ne- 
ver want Force to allay all Thoughts of wronging ſo 
much Goodneſs. 


Mrs. Britt. Well, Sir, I do believe you to be a 


Man of Honour, and hope you will not wrong my 
good Opinion. 


Enter Sir Peter, Lady Pride and Brittle, behind them. 
They grow enrag'd to ſee em together, and make 
. Revenge. Sir Peter lays bis Hand upon bis 
Sword. | | 


Therefore meet me this Evening at the Garden-Door 
about Nine, and there we'll diſcourſe farther : If 1 
find what you ſay be real, perhaps I may be prevail'd 
upon to venture farther. | | 
Love. Madam, you bleſs me! (Kiſſes ber Hand. 
Britt. Have a little Patience—— g 
Let's draw nearer, and hear what they ſay. 
ay Ty (They go nearer. 
Dam. Oh Madam! Madam ! my Maſter, Sir Peter, 
and my Lady, are juſt behind you. 
Mrs. Britt. Ha! undone for ever! 
Love, What will become of me then? 
Alrs. Britt. Let me alone to bring it off. 
(Jo Love. Aft. 
Be not you ſurpriz d at any thing I ſay, but ſeem to 
humour it. | NE 


6s = ans @ an 


The Manton Wife. 57 
I'll hear no more. (Seems to be angry with Lovemore. 
What do you tell me of your being. amaz'd ! Did 
you ever ſee any thing in me, that cou'd encourage 
89 to believe 1 was that Woman you took me for? 
'll warrant you thought, becauſe I ſeem'd to give 
you Encouragement before my Husband Yeſterday, 
when he had enrag'd me, that I was in earneſt ? 

(They over-bear, ſeem angry, and to threaten Brittle, 
who pretends by Signs to excuſe bimſelf. 

Love. What mean you, Madam ? ( Confaſed'y 

Mrs. Britt. But you will find your ſelf deceiv'd : 

For tho* my Husband gives me Provocations to uſe 
him at any rate, yet, Sir, I'd have you to know, I 
ſcorn Revenge ; and will not be brib'd to ſtain my 
Honour, tho? all the Wealth of the whole World 
were laid at my Feet. 

Lady. Do you hear that, Son-in-law ? 

| They flill threaten, be looks ſneakingly. 

Mrs. Britt. No, Sir, my honourable Parents brought 

me up with the ſtricteſt Care; taught me the nice Paths 

that lead to Everlaſting Fame and Glory: And he, 

who dares attempt to make me loſe my Way, de- 
ſerves to be usd thus, thus, and thus, Sir, 

(Gets near Sir Peter, ſnatches his Cane, and runs 
at Lovemore, who gets behind Brittle. She beats 
Brittle anmercifully, while Lovemore gets off.. 

Britt. Oh, Hold ! Hold! What, will you murder 

me ? (Brittle rubs his Shoulders. 
Sir Peter. Troth, Son-in-law, ſhe ferv'd you right. 
Lady. You have not half what you deſerve ; 
And I cou'd find in my Heart to | 

Sir Peter. Let him alone: III correct him. 
Son,: in-law, You are a very impudent Fellow to 
uſe your Wife thus. What can you ſay for your 
ſelf > 15 (Feels his Arms and Head. 

Britt. Say for my ſelf! Why, I ſay, 'tis all a Trick 

And a Comrivance to blind the Matter. | a 
Ty Ir 


58 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


Sir Peter. Is it not plain, you have wrong'd her? 
Do you not ſee ſhe is a virtuous and a good Wife? 

Lady. Too good for him, a Clown. 

Brut. Well, well, I am over-reach'd, I ſee. 

Sir Peter. Son-in-law, I charge you let me hear 
no more of this. And inſtantly ask your Wife's 
Pardon. 

Britt. How, Sit 

Mrs. Britt. Oh! lt him alone; twill be to no 

urpoſe. | Tk 
'm a little out of Order. 
Damaris, Lead me to my Chamber. 

| (Exeunt with Damaris. 

Sir Petey. I ſay follow her, and ask her Pardon. 

Britt. If I do, the Curſe of Cuckoldom fall upon 
me. (Runs out another way. 

Lady. Ah, graceleſs Clown. 

Come, Six Peter, let's follow, and ſee how ſhe does. 
(Are going. 


Enter Prudence. 


Pru. Madam, my Lady preſents her Service to 
your Ladyſhip and Sir Peter; and would defire your 
good Company at a Ball the Viſcount treats her with. 

Lady. Our humble Thanks to her Ladyſhip. 
We will not fail to wait upon her. 


(Exeunt Sir Peter and Lady. 
Enter Widow, meeting Lovemore. 


Widow. Oh, Mr. Lovemore ! J have expected you; 
I am glad you're come. | | 
Love. Madam, Your Ladyſhip does me too much 
Honour. | 
Pray, Madam, when ſaw you Mr. Cuningham * 
Widow, Oh, Sir! He has told me all. 
And now you talk of Mr. Caningham— Prudence, 


80 


The Wanton Wife. © 59 


go find out my Niece, and have an Eye over her. 
( Exit Pru. 

Well, Sir, I am ſorry you ſhou'd make your ſelf ſo 
great a Stranger to me. In ſuch Caſes I am not un- 
grateful. And where Love is real, there's a double 
Obligation. | 
Love. Ha! What does ſhe mean by Love and dou- 
ble Obligations? (A/ide. 

Widow. I ſee indeed you ſeem to be in ſome Diſor- 
der, that Iſhould know it; but had you let me known 
it ſooner, I ſhou'd perhaps have fav'd you a gteat 
many Sighs and Heart-Akings, which your Baſhful - 
neſs has caus d. | 

Love. Sure ſhe's mad! [A ſide.] Madam 
Widow. And yet tis never too late to ſerve a Friend, 
and one that loves ſo dearly: Nor am I yet ſo far 
engag' d, but I can pity, nay make Return, when Love 
is ſincere, and ſo conſtant. 
Love. Madam, you much amaze me ! 
Nor can I gheſs what you drive at , 
Widow. Ah, dear Sir! I know you are unwilling 
to let me know it: But ſhall I be ſincere in asking 
you one Queſtion ? | | 
Love. Moſt freely; ſo it be not any thing that 
leads me farther into the dark. | 

Widow, Do you not love me, Sir? 
3 Love you, Madam! Why truly I hate no 
| Widow, Well, but love me ſo, that it much diſturbs 
you, and that you fear I am engag d to another. 

Love. The Devil take me if I ever lov'd you, or 
can think what you wou'd be at. 

Widow, Nay, I was told you would deny it, 
But pray, Sir, tell me truly; for indeed, Sir, I am 
ſorry you ſhould ſuffer for my Sake. And ſhould 
you do otherwiſe than well, I vow it would be a 
Means of giving me diſquiet as long as I live. : | 
| | | obe 


60 The Amorous Widow : Or, 
Lowe. Pray, Madam, who told you this? 


Widow. Your Friend Mr. Cuningbam, who is much 


concern'd for you, Sir. And ſince you find it is diſ- 
cover'd, you need not be aſham'd to.own the Truth, 


Enters Prudence, and liſtens. 
Love. Faith, Madam, to deal freely with you, 


yov're abus'd ; for hang me if ever I had a thought 
that way, nor do I love you, or ever can. 


Widow. You're pleasd to be merry, Sir; but | 


muſt tell you, I have obſerv'd it in your Looks; and 
fince it is ſo, own it boldly to the World, and I 
promiſe you, I'll not be aſham'd, nor diſown mine. 


Come, come, Mr. Lovemore, you muſt not deny me 


that z for fince I dare own it, why ſhould you think 
it ſtill amiſs? | 
Love, Well ! Since all muſt out, prepare to hear 


me. 
Mr. Caning ham has begun, and I muſt make an End. 
You muſt know, Madam, Mr. Caningbam loves you 
to that degree himſelf, that he's aſham'd, knowing 


how near a-kin he is to you, to let you know it, and 


ſo has form'd this Story upon me, the better to make 
for him. | 
Widow, Mr. Cuningham a- kin to me, Sir | 
Love. Ay, Madam, your Nephew, your Brother's 
Son, whom he had in Paris by Madam D'0lone, but 
for ſome Reaſon he fince has chang'd his Name. 
IWidow. Truly, Sir, you ſurprize me much! My 
Brother in Paris I heard had a Son, but what became 
of him I know not. | | 
Love. Madam, this Cuningham, my Friend, has 
the Misfortune (Misfortune I think it, and he rhinks 
ſo too, becauſe he loves ſo dearly) to be related to 
you. | 


17 un 


wW =. 


Py 143 


eh 


1— „ ys Hed 


— 


5 


The Wanton Wife. 61 
Widow, I'm ſorry, if he does love ſo well, that he 
ſhou'd be ſo near a-kin. | | 
Pru. Madam, Mr. Cuningham is juſt come in. 
Love. I'll leave you, Madam, for I have a little 
Buſineſs that I muſt diſpatch—— Beſides, *rwou' 
not be convenient for me to interrupt what Diſputes 
you two may have. 
Widow. Sir, your Servant. 4 
(As be goes out, meets Cuningham ent ring. 


Love. Had you no body to put your Tricks on, but 


me ? 
But I think I have been even with you. (Exit Love. 

Cun. What can he mean ? 

Widow. Mr. Cuningham, you do not deal like 2 
Friend by me; you might have truſted me with a 
Secret of greater weight. 

Can. I do not underſtand you, Madam 


What has he been ſaying to her ? (Aide. 
Widow. You knew one Mrs. D'0/one, I ſuppoſe ? 
Cun. What (ſhall I fay now? (Aide. 


Pru. Was your Brother then Mrs. D'Olone's Hus- 
band, Madam, and Mr. Cuningham's Father? 

IWidow. Who bid you ſpeak ? Yes he was. What 
then ? 

Cun. Oh, I begin to ſmoke it. (Ade. 

Pru. Nothing, Madam, but then Mr. Cæning bam is 
your Nephew. 
Widow. Indeed, I wiſh he were not; but fince 
it is ſo, we muſt be ſatisfied with our Fate, Mr, Ca- 
ningham : Tho' you are much to blame, Sir, you 
LAS let me know ir ſooner before Matters went 

ar. 

Cen. Madam, I confeſs my Fault, and do ask your 

Ladyſhip's Forgiveneſs. 


8 Enter 


62 The Amnoroms Widow : Or, 


Enter Philadelphia. 


Widow. Well, Mr. Cuningham, ſince you are my 
Nephew, we may venture to embrace without a Bluſh. 
(She embraces bim, 
Phil. Is Mr. Cuningam your Nephew, Madam? 
Widow. Yes, Miſtreſs Pert, what then? 
Phil. Then he's my Coufin, and I may embrace him 
too. (Runs and embraces each other, 
Cun. Ay, my. dear, dear Couſin. 
Widow. Why how now ſaucy, impertinent Slut. 
How dare you take this Liberty ? ; 
Phil. Why, is there any Harm in embracing one's 
own Coutin ? 
Widow. Get you in, Huſly, and dare not to come 
but when I call you. 
Pru. He's none of your Coufin, Madam. 
| (Aſide to Phil. as ſhe goes out. 
Phil. J know it. I met Mr. Lovemore laughing 
by the way, who told me all. Adieu, my dear . 
Exit. 
Can. My charming Couſin, farewel. \ 
Widow. III ſwear, Mr. Cuningham, you'll ſpoil 
that Girl. e 
Methinks you embrac'd her ſomething of the hardeſt. 
(Seems diſturb d. 
I call her Girl, and yet ſhe's near five and twenty 
Bur as I was going to tell you, Sir, You muſt know, 
this Brother was not indeed my own Brother, bur 
ſomething a kin afar off: He was my firſt Husband's 
firſt Wife's Brother, and no kin to me. Bur becauſe 
my Husband us d to call him Brother, I would ſome- 
times do fo too; and by this Means was thought, by 
thoſe that knew no other, to be my Brother. 
Pru. Then he is not fo near a-kin, but he may 
marry your Ladyſhip ? 
Cun: 


Ihe Wanton Wife. 63 


8 . (Sighe, 
Widow, Why, truly, Mr. Cuningham——- 


Enter Jeffrey in haſte, 


Zeff. Sir, your Lawyer bid me tell you, your Cauſe 
is jult now coming on; and if you do not appear, 
you'll be non-ſuited. 5 

Widow. Dear Sir, do not negle& your Buſineſs, nor 
let your being a-kin trouble you. 

When next I ſee you. RES 

Cun. Oh, Madam! Won'd I had never ſeen you, 
then Id been happy; but where the Tye of Blood 
bars our Hopes, there's nothing but Deſpair in view. 
Madam, farewel. | 
Find ſome way to excuſe me, you Dog, or Pl cut 
your Throat. (To jeffrey as be goes out. 

Zeff. What ſhall I ſay? | 
My Maſter has begun a Lie, and I muſt end it. 

Widow. Come hither, Feffrey. Doſt think thy Ma- 
ſter loves me ſo well as he lays? _ 

Zeff. Faith, Madam, I believe he loves your La- 
dyſhip but too well! But Mr. Lovemore dies, unleſs 
you take pity on him. 


Widow. Doſt think he loves me better, than thy 
Maſter ? | | 
Zeff. Oh, Madam ! They ought not to be nam'd 


together. Mr. Lovemore, poor Gentleman, is perfect 
ly beſide himſelf about it. | 


Widow, Didſt ever hear em talk about me? 


Zeff. A thouſand times. Mr. Lovemore can talk of 
nothing elſe. 


Widow. *Tis ſtrange he ſhould deny it to me, 


Jeff. You muſt know, Madam, my Maſter was in 
Love elſe-where. 


Widow. How 7Zefrey. 
Jah. 


64 The Amorons Widow + Or, 


Fe. If your Ladyſhip will have Patience to hear 
me out, you ſhall know the whole Story. 

Widow. With all my Heart, Zefrey. 

Zeff. Why, you muſt know, Madam, my Maſter 
had the Misforrune to quarrel with a Gentleman, who 
urg d him to fight; my Maſter killd him: Upon 
which .he was forc'd ro change his Habit and his 
Name From Cuning ham to Bontefeu. But think- 
ing it not ſafe to ſtay here, fled; and in his Journey 
happen'd into a Viſcount's Caſtle, but the Viſcount 
was gone a Journey. However, this Viſcount had a 
very beautiful Siſter, that had the Command in her 
Brother's Abſence ; ſhe entertain'd my Maſter very 
ſplendidly. : At laſt he fell in love with her, and ſhe 
with him. : 

Widow. Methinks ſhe was very forward, Jeffrey. 
-  Zeff. She was ſo indeed, Madam; for before my 
Maſter left her, ſhe prov'd with Child. 
p Widow. How ! with Child, and not married, 7ef- 
rey ! 7 
Feff. My Maſter had promis d her Marriage, 
Madam. | | 

Widow. Oh, the impudent Creature ! - And thy 
— Maſter was to blame, not to keep his Word, Fefirey- 

_ Feff- Not at all, Madam, when you have heard all. 
You muſt know, my Maſter grew jealous of one of 
the Servants, as indeed he had Reaſon: And one 
Day pretended to ride out, and he ſhou'd not return 
that Night, but left me to let him in, when the Ser- 
vants were all a- bed, which I did. Going up to this 
Lady's Bed. Chamber, and not being expected that 
Night, found the Servant in Bed with her. 

Widow. Unheard-of Impudence ! 


At firſt-I was going to condemn thy Maſter, for de- 


ceiving a young Creature; but tis likely he was not 
the firlt, that had to do with her. 


25 


t 


I The „ anton Wife. 68 
Zeff. Very likely ſo, Madam. Next Day my Ma- 
iter was for packing up his Awls, and for going; 
ſhe cry'd, and urg'd his ſtay, and his Vows to marry 
her. | 
Widow. He had been more to blatne to have done 
that. | | 

Zeff. In the mean time the Viſcount return'd, found 
his Siſter in Tears, wou'd know the Reaſon, was told 
all. He ſwore, if ever he could ger hold of him; 
he'd hang him at his Caſtle Gate, but my Maſter 
was got off ſafe. What ir will come to, it they 
ſhould ever meet, I know not, but fear the Event. 


Pru. A well invented Lye the Rogue has told. (4/ide; 


What was this Viſcount's Name ? ; 

1% The Viſcount Sans-lerre, I think he was 
call'd. ä 

Pru. The Viſcount Sans. Terre! 

Widow. Why, he's in this Houſe. 

Jeff. What, in this very Houſe ? 

Pry. In this very Houſe; in the next Room. 

Jeff. Ah, my poor Miſter! he's but a dead Man; 
if he's found; tor he'll certainly be hang'd. 

Pry. Hete he comes. Hold your Peace 


Enter Viſcount. 


Widow, My Lord, your Servant. I have a Queſtion 
to ask of you. | 

Zeff: What ſhall I do to make him underſtand ? 
| | | (Aſide. 
Humour her in all ſhe ſays, my Lord. | 

Viſc; Ask what thou wilt, I'll deny thee nothing. 

Wide, You had a Sitter. 

Viſc. J had ſo, Go on, 

Widow; And ſhe was unfortunately wrong'd by a 
hife Fellow. ; | 

Viſe; What muſt J ſay next? | 

5 Pru, 


” = * 23 3” 7 4 — 
a _— _ q „ Nee TY * 1 = 0 4 K * 
- 2 ; £4 is + as . 8 LESS 5 
— 2 - - - ” ff > —_ — LY 9 C = - > — 3 = L 
2 — ol > - 22 — 3 


2 


ke 


FE. — 


66 The Amorous W idow : 'Or, 


Pru. Twas not well done to debauch her, and then 
to leave her ; but Woe be to him, if your Lordſhip 
catch bim. a 

Viſc. If ever I do find the Son of a Whore, Ill hang 
him at my Caſtle Gate. = 

Widow. He was very much to blame indeed ; but 


pet, all things conſider'd, he was not in all the Blame 


neither, counting what a Trick ſhe play'd him. He 
had reaſon to queſtion, whether the Child was his, 
or not. 

Viſc.. Pm quite at a Loſs, Oh! tell me what muſt 

ſay next? (Farnts into Jeftrey's Arms, who inflrutts hin. 
Pe. Take it in your Ear, my Lord. (Afde. 

Hide. Help, Prudence, my Lord faints. 

Pru. Pray, M:dam, don't come too near, but give 
him Air. (Prudence and Jeffrey tell him what to ſay. 

Widow. Oh !. he recovers. 

Viſc. Give me a little Air. I beg your Pardon, I 
never hear my Sifter's Wrongs mention'd, but it puts 
me in Diſorder ; but if ever I do light upon the Vil- 
lain, Woe be to him. 

Nido. III try to get his Pardon. (4/ade. 
My Lord, methinks her Crime being the greateſt, 
you might pardon him. | 
 Viſc. What! Pardon him, that has deflower d my 

Siſter, got her with Child of a Baſtard, and ſtaind 
the Honour of our great Family! No, tho? all the 
World ſhould plead for him, P11 not forgive it; he 
dies. 

IW:dow. Good, my Lord, for my Sake. 

Liſc. *Tis all in vain, Lady. I'm told he's now in 
this Houſe, and bas chang'd his Name. But if I find 
him-— 8 (Draws, 
View. Oh hold, my Lord, I muſt fave him. (Aide. 
My Lord, I have but one Requeſt more. 

Viſc. *Twill be in vain: Fl have Revenge. 


Pru, 


Ii. 


The Wanton Wife. 67 


Pru. Tell him you'll marry him, Madam, and try 


what that will do. (Aide to the Widow. 


Widow. Give me this Gentleman's Life, and I am 


content to be your Wife; otherwiſe | 
Viſc. *Tis a hard Requeſt ; but to ſhew how much 


{ love you, upon that Condition I grant it. 
1 (Puts up bis Sword. 
Widow. Or, if you think fit, you ſhall have my 
Niece Philadelphia, and with her I'll give you ten 
thouſand Pounds. Eons 
Viſc. Do you think my Love ſo poor, that 'twill 


be brib'd? Nay, then I recal my Promiſe. He dies 


this Hour, (Draws and ſearches about. 

Pru, Oh, pray my Lord, forbear; my Lady did it 
but to try you! See, you tright her. 

Widow. Well, my Lord, ſince it muſt be ſo, my 
Chaplain is within, I'm contented he ſhou'd make us 
one, make good but your Promiſe. 0 

Viſc. 1 confirm it here. (Kiſſes ber, 

Pru. My Lord, the Dancers are ready to begin, 
and all the Company ſtay for you. 

Viſc. Let em enter, and begin when they pleaſe. 


Enter Sir Peter Pride, Lady Pride, Lovemore, Mrs. 
Brittle, Cuningham and Philadelphia. 


Love. Well, Madam, I rely upon your Promiſe, 
| 5 (To Mrs. Briitle. 
Viſc. Come, Gentlemen and Ladies, pray fir. 
. (They Sit. 


A DANCE, 


E 2 Aſter 


— 228 — 2 
—— * 0 — 5 i 1 = Y : " — > of = 
K „„ ANDY af if ES IEEE} 
—— ————— — — — 2 - — is 


68 The Amorous Widow : or, 


After the Dance, Enter Barnaby Brittle, who runs af. 
ter his Wife; they get between, be gets bold of her, 
and carries ber off after Speaking, 


Britt. Here's fine Doings! But I'Il ſpoil your Sport. 
What! my Houle is become a Muſic-houſe, is it? 
But, Gentlewoman, I have ſomething ro ſay to you 
within, | | 

Omnes. How now! What's the Meaning of this ? 

Britt. I fay, my Wife 

Omn, What of your Wife? 

Britt. Shall keep me Company, if you pleaſe. 

Omn. You Company 

Cun. What's the matter with the Fellow ? ha! 

Britt, Come along, I ſay. What's here to do 
Is not a Man's Wife his Wife? And may he not do 
what he will with her ? (Carries ber off. 

Sir Peter. He's at his old Tricks again. 


Widow. Come, let's in, and endeavour to appeaſe 


him, and then end our Mirth with a Banquet. 

Cun. We attend your Ladyſhip. 

Widow, Pray, my Lord, do me the favour to lead 
my Siſter in. 
Come, Gentlemen. 


Viſc. Hold there, I will not part with you; I | 


have two Hands, Madam, and can lead you both. 
( Exeunt  Omnes. 


ACT 


La at FAY awd £©% 


h 
d 
* 
u 
0 
* 


218 


. 


Enter. Cuningham, Philadelphia and Jeffrey. 


Jeff. Ft nothing; by what I could learn, by this 


time the old Lady is gone to her Chamber, 


or near being a · bed. 
Cun. Then we may have Time to talk more freely. 
Pbil. All is not ſo fate as you imagine. I fear 
another Storm before we yet can land. I know not 
by what means, but the Viſcount is diſcover'd to be 
2 Counterfeit, which I have all along ſuſpected; but 
whether *tis come to the Knowledge of my Aunt yer, 


\ I know nor. 


Cun. Therefore let's loſe no time, bur tye that 
Knor, which joins our Hearts and Hands for ever: 
That once over, we have no farther need of the Viſ- 
count. | 


Enter Lovemore, and the Viſcount enrag'd, with 


Lights before em. 


Viſc. Never perſuade me; I'll not ſtay to be fool'd 
at this rate any longer.— Go lead, Sirrah. 
8 (Exit with Links, 
Cin. What's the Matter now? 
Love. Matter! Why there's Matter enough in 
hand. We are all undone ; the Match is broke off 
again, and you are like to loſe your Miſtreſs. The 


Widow will not conſent you ſhall marry her Niece; 


upon which, the Viſcount enrag'd, (as indeed he has 
Cauſe) is reſolv'd to ſtay no longer, 
What 'twill come to, I know not. 


E 3 Cun. 


The Wanton Wife. 6 9 f 


I 


70 The Amorons Widow : Or, 


cun. This is moſt unlucky. What's to be thought 
on next ? 

Love. I left Pradevce reaſoning the Caſe with her 1 ; 
what will be the Concluſion, is moſt uncertain, Oh! 
here ſhe comes, 


Enter Prudence. 


Pru. Oh, Madam! the ſaddeſt News! | 

Phil. Why? What's the Matter? 

: Pru. All the Buſineſs is over. Poor Mr. Cuning- 
am 

Phil. Ha! What of him ? Speak. 

Pru. After a thouſand Arguments, which I us'd to 
perſuade her, ſhe has at laſt reſolv'd I can't 
ſpeak it, 

Phil. On what? Piithee out with it. 

Pru. Why, to marry the Viſcount her ſelf, and give 
- and your ten thouſand Pounds to Mr. Cuning- 


-S 


Tas, Oh the bleſsd News! Whgt ſay you now, 
Madam ? 

Phil. Ill ſwear I was in a Fright at firlt. 
But art thou ſure ſhe'll hold in this Mind? 

Love. For fear of the worſt, get all things ready, 
and let it be done this Moment. 

Pry. Here ſhe comes. Seem concern'd to pars 
with ber, Sir, and try how ſhe ſtands reſoly'd. 


Enter Widow. 


Cun. And mult I then loſe her, Prudence 
Oh, the racking Thought ! Hard ! Hard! Decree of 
Fate! To part With all I hold moſt dear! I cannot 
bear it. (Walks about. 
Ii doro. ves, Mr. Cuningham, our Stars will have 


it ſo, 
Tis 


| . The Wanton Wife. 71 


Tis hard indeed to part: But fince there is no way 
left to ſave your Life, (which more than all the 
World I prize) but this only, I have at laſt refolv'd 
(tho'ꝰ much againſt my Will) to give my ſelf to the 
Viſcount. 

Cun. Oh! do not name it, Madam, the very 
Thought is worſe, than Death. | 

Widow, I'm ſorry we are ſo near a kin, but that's 
not the chief Reaſon ; your Vow to marry another, 
and yet when I confider ſhe was falſe, and had to 
do with more, than one, and that the Child might as 
well not be yours, I think you were in the right to 
part: So I am content (fince my Hopes are lolt) that 
you ſhou'd marry with my Niece, But believe me, 
you do not know how much I'm troubled, rogee an- 
other take what I ſo much defird. But we mult en- 
deavour to be-ſatisfied. 

Cun. Never! Never! for ſince I loſe you, farewel 
to Love and Joy: The reſt of Lite I'll waſte in Sor- 
row. 20 : * 

Exter Fieapole, whiſpers Lovemore. 

Clod. Softly ] Damaris bad me tell you, that her 
Miſtreſs ſtays for you at the Garden Door. 

Love. Ob, very well. I'll go this Moment. 


Pru. But what will you do to recal the Viſcount, 


Madam, who left the Houſe in Anger, nor told any 
one what his Deſigns were? | 

Love. I heard him bid the Link-boy lead to the 
Devil Tavern. If you pleaſe, thither we'll go, and 
conclude upon the Matter. A Glaſs or two of Wine 
may fetch him about again. | 

Widow. Truly, Mr. Lovemore, I'm much oblig'd 
to you, and ſhall endeavour to return your friendly 
Advice. I hope we ſhall live as loving Neigh- 
bours ought, but now we loſe rime. The Viſcount 
may perhaps be gone, ſhould we ſtay longer. 


E 4 Love, 


ya The Anorows Widow : gr, 


Love. Il but give ſome Directions to my Man, 
and be there almoſt as ſoon as you. | 
 Wrilew. You will oblige us, Sir. 

(Exit all but Love. and Clod. 

Cod. *Tis main dark, nothing to be ſeen but the 
Sky and Stars, What can this Darkreſs portend ! The 
Almanicks this Year ſay, That many things will be 
huddled in the dark. 

Love. Why, thou art an Aſtrologer, Clodpole, thou 
talk'ſt ſo learnedly. | 

Cod. Why, truly I am but a Piece of one; but had 
I been a great Schollard, I believe I ſhou'd have 
thought on things, that never had been thought on 
before. 7 a 

Lova Very likely, truly. But hark! What Noiſe 
is that? There's Brittle's Houle ; may be ſhe is co- 
ming out. 


Enter Mis. Brittle and Damaris. 


Mr. Britt. Softly Damaris, Juſt ut the Door, 
ell nor be far from it. 

Dam. Is your Husband faſt, Madam? 

Mrs. Britt, T would not ſtir till I ſaw him aſleep; 
he's ſnoring like one thar's drunk. 

Love. That's her Voice. Madam, where are you? 

Dam. There they are, Madam. 

Mrs. Britt. You find, Sir, I am as good as my 
Word. I hope you are a Man of Honour, as you ſay ; 
yet were it to do again, I ſhould hardly venture ſuch 
another bold Attempr, ' > 

Love. Fear nothing, Madam. Your Perſon and 
your Honour both are ſafe, whilſt I am your Guard. 
Can none over-hear us ? 

Ars. Britt, All the Family, but Damaris and I, are 
gone to Bed; nor dare we be long from thence, lelt 
my Husband ſhould wake, and miſs me. 

3 | . Love. 


The Wanton Wife. 73 


Love. Talk not of parting e er we well are met 
that were unkind, Madam. | 
If you pleaſe, Madam, to walk a little farther this 
way, here's a Place more private, than the reſt, and 
will beſt befir our Diſcourſe. 
Mrs. Britt. Well, Sir, Il not queſtion your Ho- 
nour any more, but truſt my ſelf with you; as you 
behave your ſelf now, expett a greater Liberty ano- 
ther time. | 

Love. I'll warrant you: This way, my Charmer, 

(He leads ber out; ſhe takes bold of Damaris, who 


follows. 
Mrs. Britt. Damaris! 
Dam. Tm here, Madam. 
(Clodpole feels with hig Stick for Damaris. 


ud. Damaris! — Softly | — Damaris! 
Damaris!“ 


Enter Brittle, groping in the dark in a Cap and a 
| N ght -Gown, 


Britt. Whete can ſhe be gone at this time of Night? 
I heard her ſteal down; T'11 liften. 


Clod. Damaris, Where art thou, Damaris !—— 
Odd, 'tis main dark. a 


Britt. Who have we here? Here's ſomething more 
than ordinary. But I'll draw nearer. 2 
(Goes towards bim, 

Clod. Damaris, Where art thou ? | 
Britt. Here. (In a low Voice: Clodpole feels him 
| with bis Stick, thinks tis Damaris. 
Clod. Oh! art thou there? | 
Well, Damaris, muſt not thee and I follow the Ex- 
ample of thy Miſtreſs, and my Maſter ? III warrant 
they Il be hugeous kind to one another; for my Ma- 
ſter, you muſt know, has a mighty Love for her, and 
ſo belike ſhe has for him; or elſe ſhe wou'd ne er a 
left her Husband a-bed to a come to him. Britt. 


74 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Britt. Oh horrid ! *cis ſo. (Aſide. 

God. How he ſnores now, if a Body were to hear 
him! Poor Cuckold! He little dreams what his Wife 
and my Maſter are doing. Ha, ha, ha. 

Britt. Oh! this is my Country Chap again. (Aſide. 

Cod. Poor Cuckold, tis good enough for him. For 
as they ſay, he uſes her mighty ill. Bat, Damaris, 
muſt thee and I part thus? One little Bit to ſtay my 
Stomach, Damaris: Tis fit, we ſhou'd follow our 


Leaders. (Goes to Kiſs. 
Britt. J can hold no longer. Who goes there? 
| SN (Hits him a Box. 


Clod. Odd ſo! Oh! Oh! Who's that? Oh! 

Puts bis Stick a-croſs, and in running out-ſtops a- 

gainſt the Scenes; at liſt gets off. 

Britt. So—— He's gone. Here's a Diſcovery at 
laſt ! Here's a fine Virtuous Wife for you! But now 
all will out in ſpite of her. I'll ſend inſtantly for 
her Parents; they ſhall ſee now who's in the right. 
Oh bleſs us! What, make her Husband a Cuckold! 
Oh! Monſtrous ! (Goes to the Door, and calls. 
Zeremy ! the Varlet's a-{leep, I'll warrant, Fereny, 


y. 
(Jer. above) Do you call, Sir? N | 
Britt. Yes, I do call. Come down quickly, I mult 
ſend you to my Father-in-law's. 
Fer. I come, Sir. (Puts a Rope out, and ſlides down. 
Britt. Make haſte, Sirrah, How long you are co- 
ming. Ah! Villain! | 
(Jeremy treads upon his Toes, and gets from him. 
You have trod upon my Corns, and lam'd me. 
Come hither, and be hang'd. | 
Fer. I dare not, Sir; you'll beat me. 
Britt. Ah! *tis well I ſtand in need of thee. 
, (Comes to him. 
Run to my Father and Mother-in-Law, and tell em, I 
intreat to ſpeak with em this Moment; tell em I'll 
| | | never 


The Wanton Wife. | 76 


never trouble em again as long as I live; beg em by 
all means to come. 


Fer. Ves, Sir. (Exit. 


have. 
Now I ſhall ſure convince em of their Error 
But I hear ſome body coming! 


May be I ſhall make a farther Diſcovery. (Stands of de. 


Enter Lovemore, Mrs. Brittle, Damaris, and 
 Clodpole. 


Mrs. Britt. Nay, Sir, Pve ſtay'd long enough for 


one time : Should my Husband wake, and mils me, I 
were undone. 


I muſt be gone. 

Love. Stay one Minute longer, I beſeech you, 
Madam. 
I have not told you yet: 


— Britt. No more, Sir, if you love me. Fare- 
we 


Love. Oh, ſtay! How can you go, and leave me 
ſo ſoon? 
You will have time enough to lie by that dull, 
ſtupid Clod, your Husband, &er the Morning: Me- 
.thinks I grudge him the leaſt Look of you, fince he 
knows not how to value ſo rich a Jewel. Let him 
live, and pore o'er his Bags, his Droſs, and worldly 
Gains, whilſt we know better how to waſte our 
Hogg Hours in ſofteſt Kiſſes, and everlaſting 
oys. 

web Oh, blaſting Sound! But I have heard e- 
noug 
Now to my Poſt. (Exit. 


Mrs. Bit. Good Night, Sir: Now I muſt be 
gone. 


Lobe. When ſhall I be thus bleſs'd again? 
| a : i Mrs. 


Britt. Now they ſhall ſee wht a Daughter they 


| 76 The Amorous Widow : Or, © 


Mrs. Britt, To Morrow Tll ſend for you; and, if 
poſſible, appoint another Meeting. | 
Love. Till then, ten thouſand Angels wait on thee. 
One Kiſs &er we part. | (Kiſſes her. 
Oh, I could dwell for ever on thy Lips! 
Sure, there's Enchantment on em. 
Mrs. Britt. Farewel! 
Love. Adieu, my lovely Charmer. (Exit with Clod, 
Mrs. Britt. Now, Damaris, let's ſteal in: Softly! 
Softly! 
Dam. O Lord, Madam! We are undone ! 
The Door is faſt ſince we have been out. 
(Puſhes againſt it. 
Mrs. Britt, What ſhall we do now, Damaris? 
Dam. I wiſh my Maſter has not been down. 
Mrs. Britt. Let's call Jeremy ſoftly. 
Both. Feremy ! Jeremy ! 
* (They both call up to the Window in a ſoft Tone. 


Brittle at the Window above. 


Britt. Feremy ! Jeremy (In their Tone. 
Dam. Oh, Madam, my Maſter ! | 
Mrs. Britt. Loſt! Undone for ever 

Britt, Ah! Ha! my ſweet Lady! Have I caught 
you at laſt ! | 
Feremy !. Feremy ! | 
Where has your ſweet Ladyſhip been, I pray, that 
you are ſo afraid of being diſcover'd ? Come, I know 
you have a Lie in readineſs: Let's have it. 

Mrs. Britt, No where but Juſt with Damaris, to 
take a little of the frefh Air; that's all, indeed, ſweet 
Husband. 

Britt. To take the freih Air, quotha ! 
Ah, I rather believe *twas to take a Heat, you Witch 
you. 


Mrs. 


IT) be Wanton Wife. 77 
Mrs. Briit. Pray, Husband, let the Door be o- 
en'd ? 
; Britt. No: You ſhall ſtay there till your Parents 
come. | 
J have ſent for them: They ſhall ſee what Hours you 
keep. And know of your Gallant you juſt parted 
from, your vigorous Lover. 
Dam. Madam, he over-heard all, 
And we are undone. (Aſide to ber, 
Britt. What, have you no Excuſe ready? | 
No Iavention? You and your wicked Inſtrument there, 
that ſtands like the Serpent at Eve's Elbow, to tempt 
her to Sin. | | 
What, is your Prompter to Wickedneſs dumb? 
I'd fain hear how you intend to excuſe it. 
R Mrs. Britt. I don't go about to excuſe it, Hus- 
and | 
Britt. No; That's becauſe you don't know how. 
Mrs. Britt. I do confeſs, I have been to meer a 
Gentleman, but not alone; Damaris was with me. 
_ ſure there was no Crime in a little harmleſs 
hat. | X 
Britt. No, no, not in the leaſt; making me a Cuc- 
kold is no harm at all. | 
Mrs. Britt. Pray, Husband, let me in, and Fll ne- 
ver do the like again, as long as I live ; but you 
ſhall hence-forward find me the moſt dutiful Wife, 
that you could wiſh for. Pray, Husband, truſt me 
but this once. 
Britt, No. | 
Mrs. Britt. Do not diſgrace me to my Parents, by 
expoſing me at this unſeaſonable Hour, in which I do 
confeſs I am much to blame 
Britt. Oh! Do you ſo? 


Mrs. Britt. But forgive me now, I'll never do it 
again. 


3 | Brit, 


78 The Amorous Widow: Or, 

Britt. Hang them that believes you, I ſay. 

Mrs. Britt. I am ſure I never injur'd you in all my 
Life; but am as innocent as the Child unborn, from 
doing the Ill, which you ſuſpett. 

Britt. It may be ſo: Twas not your Fault then. 

Mrs. Britt. Pray, dear Husband, believe me, and 


let me in. 

Britt. No. 

Mrs. Britt. On my Knees I ask your Pardon, do 
but open the Door. 

Brut. No. 

Mr.. Britt. If you let me in this time, twill work 
upon me more, than all the . in the World 
cou'd do beſide. 

Britt. J care not. 

Mrs. Britt. Indeed, Husband, T love you 3 
and love you only: How can you then be ſo cruel to 
refuſe me ? | 

Britt. Ah, cunning Crocodile ? | 
Now you are caught, tis dear Husband, ſweet Hus- 
band, tis only you I love: But at another time, tis 
good for nothing old Fool, No, no, I know you 
well enough, and ſo ſhall your Parents now. 

Mrs. Britt. Pray, Husband, let the Door be open'd. 

Brit. No. 

Mrs. Britt. Try me but this once. 

Brit. I tell you, no. ; 

Mrs. Britt. Not once more ? 

Britt, No. 

Mrs. Britt. If you provoke me, I may deſpair, 
gio ow deſperate, and do a Deed, which you may rc 


pent 
x Britt. Good lack! What will your ſweet Lady ſhip 
02 
Mrs. Britt. I'll kill my ſelf with this Knife here. 
(Shews ber Fan. 


Britt. Oh, very well! 
4 Mrs. 


The Vanton Wife. 79 


Mrs. Britt. Nay, *rwill not be ſo well as you ima- 
gine neither. Every body. knows how ill we have 
Iiv'd, and when I'm "ld People will think you mur- 
der'd me. | 

Britt. Ay! 

Mrs. Britt. Therefore P11 kill my ſelf, to have my 
Death reveng'd upon you. 

Britt. Odd, I'll truſt to that. 

Beſides, killing ones ſelf has been a great while out 
of faſhion. But why don't you diſpatch ? Mcthinks 
you are long about it. 

Mrs. Britt, You may believe me, for ru certainly 
do it, if you perſiſt. 

Britt. Odd, FIl venture it. | 

Mrs. Britt. Beſides; when I am dead, my Ghoſt 
ſhall haunt you. 

Britt. Ah, if I cou'd but once get rid of your Per- 
ſon here, I ſhould nor fear your Ghoſt hereafter. n 

Mrs. Britt. Have you no Pity left? 

I am juſt going to do it. 

Britt. And yet you are long about it. 

Mrs. Britt, Since — but my Death can utsly 
you 
There and there 

(Pretends to tab her Self with ber Fan, and falls. 

Dam. Oh, ſhe has don't ! She has don't ! ; 
2 barbarous Monſter, to make her kill her 

elf! 

Mrs. Britt. Now, Damaris, you fand too late I did 
not jeſt 
I know thou'lt ſee my Death reveng'd upon my 
cruel Husband, who has accus'd me tallly for J af- 
firm with my dying Breath, I never wrong'd him. 
Farewel ! 


Death beckons me into a dark and gloomy Vale, where 
J muſt follow. 


Dam. 


Bo The Amorons Widow : Or, 
Dam. She's gone! She's gone! 

. Oh, thou worſe than Savage ! To murder ſo ſweet a 
Lady, ſo innocent and fo good: Nay, I'll ſwear you 
| 5 | Fn a (Cries over her. 

Britt. I hear no Noiſe ! (Looks frigbten'd. 

. IF poſſible the Devil ſhou'd be ſo great with her, 
that ſhe cou'd kill her ſelf to be reveng'd on me 

But I'll light a Candle, and go ſee. 

| (Goes from the Window. 
Mrs. Britt. Now, Damaris, ſtand cloſe in this 
Corner : 


Cloſe, Cloſe. ( They ſtand aſide. 


Enter Brittle with a Light ; they ſlip y him, go in, 
and lock the Door : He looks about. 


Britt. Ha, ha, ha! I thought indeed how well ſhe'd 
do it: Here's none of her! She made me believe ſhe 
kill'd her ſelf, and the mean while ran away. Well, 
een let ber go; I ſhall have this Satisfaction, her Pa- 
rents ſhall be Witneſs of her Hours. I'll in, and 
wait their coming. 

(Goes to the Door, and finds it loch d. Knocks, 


Mrs, Brittle and Damaris above at the Window, 
where he was. 


Mrs. Britt. Away, you idle Sot is this a time of 
Night for an honeſt Man to come home in ? 5 

Dam, Go, go, you may be aſham'd ! 

Britt. Why, have you the Impudence 

(Looks up, and ſees em above, 

Mrs. Britt. How many Nights am I forc'd to fir 
= to wait for his coming in? And he tells the 

orld, *cis I am to blame. But now it ſhall be ſeen 
who's to blame, and who not. My Father and Mo- 
ther are coming, they ſhall ſez what Hours you 

keep—— Britt. 


The Wanton Wiſe. 8 
Britt. I confeſs, I ſtand amaz'd at this Impudence. 
Mrs. Britt. They ſhall know all. i 
Britt. Why, have you the Face ro den 
Mrs. Britt, Go, go, I'll hear none of your impu- 
dent Excuſes ; you are drunk, you Sot, you Swine. 
But here comes my honourable Father and Mother. 


Enter Sir Peter and Lady Pride. 


I'm glad you are come to be Witneſs of whar ſtill 
ſuffer, by this ungrateful Uſage of a cruel Husband. 
You ſee waat Hours he keeps; every Nighc at the 
Tavern roaring with his Companions, -whillt I am 
forc'd to fit at home alone, waiting for his coming; 
and when he does come, he ſtrait raves and abuſes 
me at ſuch a rate, that I am not able to endure ir, 
Britt. Why, was there ever ſuch Impudence ! 
I wiſh this Candle were in my Belly, if 
Mrs. Britt, 1 know what he'll ſay now, if you'll 
believe him; he'll tell you, that 1 am ſtill in the 
wrong, and 'tis I that have been out at this late Hour, 
and as for his part, he has been within all this Eve- 
ning, and knows nothing of all this Matter, not he: 
But I'll leave your ſelves to judge, it this is aa Hour 
for an honeſt Husband to come home at. 
Brut. Why then may | never 5 
. - Britt. You ſee he's fo drunk, he can hardly 
and, 
Lady. Faugh!—— I ſmell him hither. 
He ſtinks of Liquors and Tobacco like a Tarpaulin, 
that has not been ſober whilſt his Twelve Months Pay 
wou'd laſt. 


Britt, ] tell you, that I am not drunk, nor have I 
been out of my Houſe. 2380 


Sir Peter. Stand farther off, I cannot bear the Scent 
of a Drunkard, 


Fa 


F Are, .. 


[9 


82 The Amorons Widow + Or, 


Mrs. Britt, I told you he wou'd deny it. 

Britt. I fay, that *tis ſhe that has been out juſt 
now, and with her Gallant, and therefore I ſent for 
you; and that I have not been out of my Doors. 

Mrs. Britt, Do you hear him? But Damaris can 
Juſtify, I have not ſet my Foot over the Threſhold fince 
Day-lighr. 

Dam. If ſhe has, never believe me more. 

I can aſſure your Honours *ris true; for I have not 
been out of her Company fince he went out to the 
Tavern, 

Mrs. Britt, Therefore I do beſeech you, good Fa- 
ther and Mother, to revenge my Cauſe, for I am not 
able to endure it any longer : If I do, you'll never 

ſee me alive another Week. | 
Britt. Tis a ſtrange thing, that ſhe muſt be belie- 
ved, and I not. 

I tell you | 

Lady. Stand farther oft. 

Faugh! What a Smell there's about him. 
(She goes croſs the Stage. 

Britt. Well then; Fl ſtand farther off, if you 
will but hear me ſpeak. (Goes backward. 
I ſhall ſay nothing but the Truth, and what I can 

rove. 

1 Sir Peter. Again at your Proofs, and your idle Jea- 
louſies 

Be dumb, Coxcomb; it were a good deed to break 
your Head, for ſending thus for us out of our Beds, 
and making Fools of us ſtill. If you ever dare to 
do the like again, we'll find a Means to handle 


OU—— 
It there be no Law (but cutting of Throats) to re- 
venge theſe Aﬀronts—— I ſay no more But re- 
member you are warn'd. | 

Britt. It you wou'd but let me tell why I ſent for 


0 
VIP | Sir 


ir 


' The Wanton Wife. 83 


- Sir Peter. We have heard and ſeen too much al- 
read 
Melde dare not to ſpeak a Word more. 
Mr.. Britt. And is this all his Puniſhment ?. 
Sir Peter. No; Come down, and he ſhall ask your 
Pardon. Tis the leaſt he can do. 
Ari. Britt. Twill be to no purpoſe; when your 
Backs are turm d, he'll be as bad again. | 
Sir Peter. I lay no more Diſputes, but do as Icom- 
mand, (They come down from the Window. 
Now, Son-in-law, kneel down, and ask your Wife 
Forgiveneſs. 
s. Britt. Shall I forgive him; no, I defire to be 
divorcd. 
1 Lady. Come, Daughter, I ſay you muſt pardon 
im. 
Mrs. Britt. Well, Madam, TIl endeavour to obey 


you 
Sir Peter. Why don't you kneel, and do as 1 com- 


mand ? 


Britt. Well, I find there's no Remedy, ſhe has o- 
ver-reach'd me again, and I muſt ſubmit : But I am' 
reſolv'd I'll get rid of this Nooze, tho' I tuck my ſelf 


up in another. | 
(Sir Peter makes him kneel to bis Wife, 


Sir Peter. Come, ſay after me. Madam, I a 
your Pardon. 

Britt. Madam, I ask your Pardon. | 

Sir Peter. For the Folly I have committed 

Britt. For the Folly I have committed in marrying 


you. 


Sir Peter. In my wild Suſpicions. 

Britt. In my wild Suſpicions. 

Sir Peter. Which I do declare were utterly falſe, 
Britt. Which I do declare were utterly falſe. 


F 2 Sir 


84 The Amorous Widow : Or, 


Sir Peter. And that I ſwear never to do the like 
again. 

Britt. And that I ſwear never to do the like again, 
it 1 were once unmarried. 

Mrs. Britt, Here—Kifſs the Book, (Gives ber Hand. 

But if ever you do't agai 
You ſce 'tis to no purpoſe to turn Hagard; if you do, 
F'll tame you. (Aſide to hin. 

Lady. Look if the Noiſe has not brought all the 
Company hither. | 10 Do 


Enter Viſcount, Widow, Lovemore, Cuningam, Phi- 
ladelphia, Prudence, Clodpole, and Jeffrey, with 
Lights before 'em. 


Love. Your Servant, Sir Peter. Sir, I hope you 
will not take it ill ; we ſaw a Light in your Houſe, 
and ſo made bold: We are reſolv'd to ſpend an Hour 
or two in Mirth, and hope you will all join with us. 

(To Brittle. 

Widow. Your Ladyſhip I know will pardon it upon 
this Occaſion. 13 (Jo Lady Pride. 

Lady Pride. Is your Ladyſhip marry'd? May we 
give you Joy ? 

Widow. My Niece and Mr. Cuninghaz are. 

Mrs. Britt. Give you Joy then. ; 

(un. and Phil. We thank you, Madam. 

Phil. Now, Sir, ſince our Hands are join'd, and all 
is reconcil'd, I have a Boon to ask. ray 

Can. Whate'er it be, conclude it done. 
= Phil. I have obſerv'd ſome Sparks of Love between 
Jeffrey and Prudence; and I believe they wou'd be 
glad to follow our Example. _ 

Can. What ſay'ſt thou, Jeffrey? If thau haſt a 
Mind to marry, ſpeak freely. a 


Tf 


The Wanton Wife. 85 


Zeff. Sir, 1 have debated much about the Matter, 
and am at laſt reſolv'd to venture. | | 

Cun. Then if you, * give your Conſent, and 
Prudence be willing, we'll put em together. 

| ( To the Widow, 

Widow. With all my Heart ; Prudence has been 
always a- good Servant, P11 ſay that for her. 

Zeff. There's my Hand then; the reſt of my Body 
ſhall be forth coming. 

Pru. A Match. 


Love. Then let me ſpeak. Clodpole loves Damaris, 
and I believe wou'd be glad ta make up the Cho- 
rus 3 now if Mrs. Brittle pleaſe to part with 
her—— 
Britt. You ſhall have my Conſent with all my 


Heart; and Pl give a Sum of Money to be rid of 
her | . f 


Love. And III give Cy ſomething to ſet him 
up in a little Farm in the Country. 

Clod. Damaris Doſt hear that? 

Mrs. Britt. What ſay you, Damaris? 


Dam. If I thought he'd make a good Husband, 


_— be jealous 
ve. That I dare anſwer for him. 

Cod. Well, then *tis agreed, and there's my 
Hand. 

Dam. For better for worſe. | 
E _ To have and to hold; a Tenement for 

ife. 

Cun. And now all things being thus happily con- 
cluded —— . | 

Widow. No, Mr. Cuningham, not while your Friend 
is unprovided. Methinks *twere pity he ſhou'd be no 
A dor in this Comedy. 

Love. Oh, Madam, my Thoughts are not yet fix d 
fo much upon any Object, but the next I encounter 
can retrieve the paſt. | jp 

Ec | UN, 


386 The Amorons Widow: Or, 
cum My Friend never wants a Miſtreſs (I'll ſay 
that for him) in any Place, if he has but an Oppor- 
tunity, which he ſeldom wants. I have often won- 
derd at his Luck. = 
Mrs. Britt. Say you fo ? I find he makes it his Bu- 
finefs to enſnare and deceive Women at this rate. 

7 WRT | (Aide. 
I'm glad I know it in time, whilſt I have Power to 
make my Retreat, I had like to have been finely 
caught. Well, Husband, ſeeing ſo many join'd in 
Happineſs, if you'll promiſe never to be jealous, PII 
promiſe from this Moment never to give you 
1 and endeavour to make you as happy as 

can. cn wy 

Britt. Wou'd you'd give me Cauſe once to believe 

ou. | 
: Viſc. Well then, if you are all agreed, the Parſon 
that marry'd Mr. Cuningham is but juſt by; een 
ſend for him, and let him end the Work he has 
begun. 
For my part, I intend to put off mine for ſome time 
longer. 
Widow. How! My Lord! Have you ſerv'd me 
thus? Did I torſake all for you, and do you pretend 
ern | 

Viſc. No Words now, *twill ſpoil Company; an- 
other time we'll diſcourſe ir farther. Come, let's 
have a Dance, and then to Bed. 8 

Onn. With all our Hearts. 


a 4 D A N '* E. | 
: rd, 


„ 


I. 


The Wanton Wife. 87 
Viſc. Tis well: So now, you that are ready to 


taſte the Sweets of Matrimony, fall to; for my part, 
I have no great Stomach to it yet. 


And none I hope will blame me if I tarry, 
Since thoſe that wed in haſte, as faſt miſcarry. 


(Excunt Omnes,
