Requested Title: THE OPPORTUNITY
Authors: James Shirley
Matched Alias: The Opportunitie
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1475-1640_the-opportunitie-a-come_shirley-james_1640
Source Title: The opportunitie. A comedy.  1640
Source Author: Shirley, James.
Source Date: 1640
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/the_opportunitie_1640_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from validated standalone Internet Archive OCR with a clear title page and opening scene.

---
OPPORTVNITIE COMED V,
Asi it was preſented by ben
Majeſties Servants, at the private Houſe in Dru Lane.
— ___=—GK
— — __
Written by Ta Mes SHIRLEY,
nnn.
L. ON DO N.
Printed by Thomas Cotes: for. Andrew Croble, and - Will, Cooke and are to be ſold at the Si the Greene Vu ge Pauli wins" e 7610.
PONY
— OO
1 " 22 off * * * — 9
14090
4 1 5 1 319709 egBVV JI 2.4
XN ENF #3
P * ” ” an.
* - * Fa m7 „ „„ 9 7 9 TY A 1484188 . 95 4 #1 F - Py , : 1 4 . 1 10 . * 1 # . 2 % * EF? i . | fir w 464714 * i 4 £ . * 7 . & 1 4 - 4 : — "_ 5 - 0 — — - - * 7 = * — wm, —_— 434 RS E 4* . - — 1 8 553 — 1 2 8 : f 2 #4 Þ. / 7 * , * , * F. 8 -þ | k — o * 8 9 4 Cd SO e X = f T — & s 4 ) # . ; -_ * - * Li 1 . > +S -
—— —
3 — —
_— ———
— — — 42 *
was. K i -
confidence in your love to Poe judgement and excellent abilitit3 wbuld at firſt have
pon this tender of my gratitude," i
10
And fiy &vet TA VEIN Nate,
Captai ne e Owen. SIR, N His Poeme, at my a va you, from WV 19 4r0ther Kingdotis Yiwherein [ enjoyd, as our imploymenti wall permit, the happi- neſſe of your knowledge, and conver ſas gion) emergent fromthe Preſſe, hd prepar'd to ſeeke entertainment abroad, I tote boldneſſe thus farre to direct to your name en Icranramt; promiſed by my
Verein your cleare
made mee leſſe adventurons;" Be pleaſd till time mature 4 worthy ſatisfaction toy favours, to ſmile while your ſer- vices call you hence to enlarge y- honour, by mak- ing your faith and valbar mort exemplary againſ 4 rebellious enemy, let me preſerve a peace at home, in the contemplation of your van and be happy
to profeſſe my ſelfe
Your humble Servant and Honoror,
IA. SMIRLIEY,
OPPORTVNITIE
THE
Act 1. Scene 1. Enter Aurelia, Piſauro, and Pimponds.
Kkpect me an howre hence, my friend and I Wil walke and fee the Citie, make it your Caro to get Supper ready. Pim. It I doe not | Iknow who's like to fare the worſe, Au. And be not Drunke Sirra at our returne. Pim, Yes I doe uſe , To be drunke before you often. Ea, Aw, About your buſineſſe: | And how doſt like the towne,and fituation, Nad Piſ. Trouble me not to anſwer ſuch dull queſtions, I ſee nere a handſome girle yet, not a peece Of a bona roba; and the Dutcheſſe hold But the complexion of thoſe we ha ſeene, 9 I wonot be corrupted with the pallace 00% fi] To be her bed-fellow, 3 | Sf UT es, You lchange opinion; Perhaps we * ſcene! none but A rubbihgger
*
1 I
* „ e —— — — 4 % , .
*
3 —
: . Nh e
The Opportunitie. There may be beauties ſignior will tempt Your wol faſtidious — feare I ſhall have much adoe to ſtave thee from em, Piſ. To quit that feare lets leave the Citie inſtantly; The meale wonot diſgeſt women, I eate int. Not ſtave me from em? | We are for the warres ; This tone will turne my blood, I wonot give A Tnlio for my courage in twelve houres, Vnleſſe they tie their women up. As. Thou haſt, A minde to ſhew thou canſt be ſatyre, patience But tull to morrow and wee*l hence. Enter Lucio. Luc. Sir, let my heart preſent your welcome home, Yeavebeene too longa ſtranger, I am happy To imbrace you agen. Au. Me, meaning me, dee know me? Luc. T hope you are not jealous of my friendfhip, I thought our familiaritie before The ſad misfurtune came that made you baniſh Your ſelfe from Urbin had poſſeſt you throughly, How firme I dare be to you. Piſ. Doe you know him Au. Doſt thou know him?I nere ſaw his eyes before To my beſt memory, are you not miſtaken. Lu. Perhaps in your affection which no art
_* Hathever made me guiltie to deſerve,
I never did betray my frĩend to make you Affect theſa clouds, but be it ſo.
Au. There is But one halſe hower added to our ages Since firſt we ſaw the Citie.
Lu. In good time. 8 | Iwill be bold to acquaint ſome bawd elſe In whom you have more faith, | | ', Ext.
Aa. What Riddles this, FM gil. #
Zis not the Gentleman o ck to ſides ons wits?
<< — 2
- — — — — -- ” * . Fn -
- - . * p * — ” - , . 2 * o >
— ———— CA oat Ms —
The opera.
What did he call you, Au. Nay I know not, he
Said we has beene famillar, in his dreame ſure, 4
For waking I nere fa w him, Piſ; You fhould have ask d his name. Au. To what purpoſe prithee. Euter Pietro.
Why does that Gentleman ſtare upon us ſo. Pie. Are you return d, this is confidence
You may repent.
Au. Save you ſignior.
Pie. And you too.
Piſ. Dee meane both ons?
Pie. One has ſome neede, yo're welcome Signior to Vrbin.
Au. Thanke you, what s your name I pray.
Pie. If you ha forgot mine, I remember Borgia. A friend of yours, deſires but to renew . |
Acquaintance wee, | Au, What friend. Pie. You will heare more.
Piſ. Tigges,fhall J after him and knocke
AE re the pate. For what.
F. For looking on s | So ſcurvily. | \
Au. That may be dangerous,
Did he not name Borgia. Piſ. But whether He meant himſelfe or you I underſtand not.
Au. He might as well ha caldme Betblem a; Lets walke on ſtill. | Ener Julio.
In, Ha Borgiastis he, my noble friend returnd,
Welcome, a thouſand welcomes in a boſome Why doe you weare this ſtrangeneſſe in your face,
Can a fewyeares render me loſt to Borgia.
Au. Sure he does call me Borgia. Is. Thou wert
Vakinde in thy departure, wich what devotion | B2 . 5 Could
W | — © _Wm_Ei 4” © — —
PT To Opprnnmene.. 3 eee
Why was not Iſummondio wait upen thee. 1 In any part o th world, but againe Lene, 1 4 | Whenarriv'd yee. - \
Au. Tamverylikeſome body, They all miftake me thus, we ha ſeene no friends finc nce. Is. Is this Gentleman. uy Au. One deare ia my acquatarance. / | 4 Iu. I am your ſervant, thy unexpected hight Will glad Aderentios heart, your nobl e facher Who hath long monra'd your abſence, Piſ. Good old man, He will rej oyce to ſee him here whe ont. Au. Remember my fathers name. Is, You have loſt an Vnele, dut all his rune 7 Your Father ts 8 . nm Au. Dead! „His age Was fit for heaven, 15 wealth is added to Your fathers to make yours the greater fortune. Piſ. Take it upon you. . Pardon noble friend,
I was perſwaded time and abſence had rf 2
Wrought ſuch a change upon my face,that no man
Would know me agen, but tho I may to ſome Appeare a ſtranger, I muſt ſtand diſcover d
Toa friends penetrating eye, agen Poſſeſt your faichfull ſervant, whats my name.
Ia. Deare Borgia,
2 Borgia I muſt remember you.
Shall Iwaite on you to your father Sin,
= Whar were I beſt co doe.
Ii. Your fitters growne a pallanr gentlewoman, The onely beautie of Vrbin, and was on Ee The Dutcheſſe, her fofc lips will ſeale your welcome.
Piſ. A handfoms gentle woman ge.
Au. He does but feaſt they afe i witches here.
Piſ. No more Teeres,
Go op be lame forgver,
r
7 *— * J. ao [iv 5:13 4d The Dar — els ino wo | wv Is. Tipquace then wiiacs'd, + | 437720 25 The favorite loves her. nend n e tl = A4, Who. Iz. He chat was cauſe: "7 Ofyour remove V-ſeni, . * V yi chin 3 ub Au. Cry you mercy, =o 414.3) £01 I know him well enough : hut does man: 7. (MES Ia. Tis 3 ſo ith court. Piſ. You will be tri | Your owne heeles up Ob > bc | 0 bir: 2 I hope my fers honeſt. . who Combs, Remember chat nam: too. 775 Ler me alone To remember her, Cornelia "th more Securitie, Ile put her in my table baoks, - Is, There is no Lady in the preſerves A clearer fame, as modeſt as thees faire, | And ſo ingenious. it: Fiſ. I woald excuſe | Her moJcftie,but ſhe may 1 ad v1 Ia timeʒtho ſlurdy O ike we know,and ſo forth Enter Mereutio, Lurio Au, You ſpeake a welcomt. Charafter. Is, Your father Ic ſeemes his willing care hath ence newes
Of your arive. | Piſ. Kueele downe. Au. See if by Gt knows me;.
Tis a wiſe father now knnwe: his ownechild, Me. My deareſt Borgia cmſort of my ape. My joy of foulg,a farhere-prayersaudbleſſing | Make thee a happy miu, my eyes maſt {peake Part of my joy in teateneleome from en A.. Your pardon git: 110 That thus I ſteale upon you, 1 wod hope My ſiſter 6 Pi. Cornelis.
4 ag ky.
4 b B 3 21 Au.
RETRY r —
— —
ww —— of Alice we «of wi. —— — is r — * „
SE R = — 9 — <
That loves us Dorgia.
e Oppor tune,
Au. Cornelia is in health.
Aer. And will be a glad ſaule to imbrace her brother Au. Your pardon Sir that I ſeem'd ſtrange to you. Lu. Tis recompence now that you pleaſe to one me. Mer. Julio an honeſt gentleman,and one
Au, Iheare my Vacle Has left us | | Pi. A good eſtate, ther's the leffe cauſe To mourne for him. Au. We muſt all tread that path, Here is a friend of mine to whoſe cruſt and favour I have beene much engag d. Mer, Sir what I want In language, Ile ſupply with other welcome, Pleaſe you to honour my poore wite. Piſ: The ſervice Ofmy unworthy life is yours, command it, I wod you had another handſome daughter. Mer. I preſume you were preſented a glad object To Lucio, your affections grew from children. Au. To Lucio we carry but one heart. FPiſ. Doe not forget his name now. Mer. But my ſonne We dwell to Jong thus 2 let us perfect. Enter Pietro. Our ceremony at home, Pietro One of the favorits creatures. Pie. Tis the Duteheſſe, Command Mercutio you waite upon her Preſently at Court, and bring young Borgia a Along wee to expect her graces pleaſure. Exit. Aer. We mult obey. | Au. W hat makes your countenance change Sir. Mer. My feares poore Borgia for thee- Au. For me. Piſ. Howes that? his feares ? Mer. While my ag'd armes are in,
rr
it. ts. Brat ——
——B . 6
— ——— ¶ —Ä[(——
a r rr E LY * _
Ae ——
= K 1 4 „81 a. PET a ack a e
| The Opportunitie. A loving contention to imbrace thee, 1 wiſh thee from hence this ground betrayd thee, © Embarke agen,the Seas have uſd thee kindly,
Truſt them agen, or any land but this:
This will undoe us both, the joy of ſeeing thee Made me forget thy danger.
Au. Danger Sir,
W hat have I done, to call theſe feares upon you? Piſ. Take heede, be wiſe, I know not what to thinke on*c
Aer. What haſt done ſaiſt, nothing to diſhonour thee, Thou kildſt him fairely. | Piſ. Kild I thinke; you were beſt Be Aurelio agen, and leave your lifter But Ile fiſh out the circumſtance, walke melancholy, Au. Prithee doe. | Piſ. Although your ſonne has pleaſd To call me friend, I finde he has reſervd Something he wod not credit to my boſome; I have obſerv d his trouble, but unwilling By moving queſtions to renew his ſufferings: : If my particular knowledge of his fate May be no prejudice, tho it be without My verge to ſerve him, I can willingly Share in their griefe that love him. Aer, You ſpeake nobly, - Twas his misfortune Sir provok'd to kill A Gentleman, brother to V ſini, who Was favorite to the Duke deceaſd, and now | Grac'd by the Datcheſſe, by whoſe power he may Command him dead, theſe ſummons I ſuſpect; But take my counſell Borgia,and deceive. His expeQation of revenge, once more He bids thee flie; wo uld ſlay thee in his heart, Let merunne their diſpleaſure, Ax. Not for me Sirs | I am reſolvd, cis better dye at home,
+ Then waſt my life an exile, Ile to Court wee.
Piſ. Vare not mad. 1 | AA.
— — v — —
—_ 14 3 — wee © 4 *
—
|
Does this proceede out of acleare forgi
7 The ,Opperteneie. Fs. Thou art a ſoole, cannot Icaſt Borgia skin off when I pleaſe, Imaſ See my faire ſiſter at a miau warning, Thon art evidence for meyather I waite you, My ſiſters there you fay,doe not doubt me; At worſt, Ile 2 a tricke to keepe my head on: Come friend and Gentlemen. T«, We attend. Exit. "Exter Durcheſee, l/ fini,Cornelis, Melinda Laa. Du. You have prevail d Vini: yet we thought Otall men living you would leaſt have beene A ſutor for his pardon, burtis _ d He owes you for his life. rf. Your mercy rather, I have confider'd madam xdid loſe A brother, whoſe repaire I ſhall not finde Now in anothers blood, the Gentleman Hath ſuffer d, though not what the Lawes determine. Many yeares pennance; ſo ſevere, perhaps That he is come by offering himſeltenow A facrifice to your juſtice, to prevent A death more killinꝑ, ſtill to live a ranger To his owne friends and countrey. Du. If your charitie | Extend fo farre, the reſt we have diſpenc'd with, He is return'd for certaine ? he iseither Wearie of life, or maſter of a ops | That might have beene hit ruine. Vrſ. This willmake | Your art of mercy (hinexhe bngheer Madam in! Gm Du. It will, — let me abkeyou good my Lneds * Ai veneſſe:
|
Time I allow may qualiſie the thought
Ot our revenge, and ſomething elſeot pitrie May ſo take off the roughneſſe of our ſoula- That we may have a noble charitie To ourenemy,but has your end no mixture Ot ſomething ele, that may advance a hope
The Opportunities To ſatisſie deſire ſome other way ? No turne ro proſit or delight? be plalne For I muſt know your breſt.
Vrf. You ſhall ſee through me, | [ dare not wearea e than tranſpar ent, am;
I lovehis ſiſter Madam, faire Cornelia | Wich choſe intents become me, in that flame [ ſacritice all thoughts that wound her brother And wiſh no happy ſatĩs faction, And by that charme of her conſent to love My brother is redev ind in Borgia. Dut. Vare briefe, yet plains ; how point Cornelia Affections. 8 | Frſ. I have wooed her but in complement, And tho there may be ſonnes to admit w rr finde ſhe is all 2 o her father, whom the apprehenſion Ol kis ſonnes fortune — 2 indiſpoſd Toa preſent reconcilement. Dxt. T his One act 3 | Will make him kinde,and forme him to your wiſhes. Yrſ. If they might have the happineſſe to be Propounded by your hi hneſſe to Mercutio, I propheſie ſucceſſe, pardon great Madam, If after all your princely favors I _ Begge this wich many bluſhes, love is grac d By dwelling on your breath. Dut. Vr ſini ſiuce The Duke dyed you have found no loſſe in out Eſteeme, to his aſhes I have paid that dutie To grace whom he affected, and be conſident We ſhall not deny this, is he not come yetf Urſ, He will attend your grace Who waits. Enter Pietro. | We
"14 &
Pie. Signior Mereutio 2 85
Expedts your graces pleaſure, with him his Borgia | | Fer. My brother. Dat. Tho wepardon him
|
To kill him, and ſo make the benefit Is meant him, of no vertue, or to himſelfe,
— — — I — * _ 83 11
me The Opportuni tie.
We muſt put on a brow of ſome diſpleaſure And chide his fault, he may be encourag d elſe To a ſecond inſolence.
Ur/. Gently I beſeech you, There may be a puniſhment within your eye
Or my deſigne.
Dut. How is the name of gentleman Diſhonor d by ſuch deſperate undertakings; That more then guiltie of humane blood, tos kill Even Charity,
Enter Mecutio gie Pe.
I if. Th are admitted.
Dut. Is that he? We ſent for you Aereutis to tell you How much you owe to good Dyſins love,
At whoſe earneſt ſolicite we have fign'd
Young Borgia pardon, if you examine well;
Vou will have cauſe to place him in a the firſt
Ranke of your friends, |
Mer, Shall I beleeve my eyes, My nnderftanding ? how is Percwtio bleſt ? Looke boy the patdom heaven reward thy charities; My Lord for faving one, command the lives | of: all our family,thou Keule of honour ; ; Looke Borgis.
Piſ. What de e meane
| Kneeleto the Durcheſſe,ad «cknowlcdge.
Bor, Whar. Piſ. A pardonfor y ourlife, Jer. lamlgſt "i. Piſauro,an excellent creature. Piſ. You'l ſpoile all,
Shee's yet your filter I doe like her too: Kneele for your pardon, and you may chooſe redes
In time, wood I ere ed on no worſe deen n would climb he Laker
* ä —— . *
creſts in you to perfe&t my ambition.
The Opportunitie.
Ha you no ſence ? humble your knees to thanke Her highneſſe and that gentleman.
Du. Why does That fellow kneele Urſin,
Urſ. Tis Signior Borgia,
His heart is full of thankes.
Du. Ilooke not for em, What doe I feele ? command him riſe,
Urſ. Deare Madam. Looke calme upon him,
Piſ. Shee'l reverſe the pardon,
Cor, Are you my brother Sir? |
Bo, As ſure as you are my fiſter; do you doubt me.
Cor, How now Cornelia, Prey excuſe me brother, My joy to ſee you ſafe doth halſe e me.
Du, Merem io.
Piſ. I am converted now, And doe beleeve there are ſome hanſome women; YoungGentleman,not too much, much at once, Remember y are ber 233 is taken.
Mer. 8 grace is to en happineſſe; My daughter 18 js — 5 2 Beſeech your Lordſhip to allow we a In ſuch acanſe as this,enquire her judgement, And finceby'th boun ofyour hi 1 Have a ſonne now, whaſe joy may be concernd in t ; I would not willingly conclude her marriage Without his voyce too.
Vrſ. Iam confident To incline his favour, ſince ſhe has declar d Herſelfeno enemy. Du. Cornelia, Dy. Sir I have a ſuite to you. Jo. You havedeſerv'd My life, which ought co waſte it cliein frvice. Urſ. Iam an honorer of your faire ſiſter,
And mn her mine.
C2
a Es -
The Opportunitie.
Zo. How do you meane my Lord,
Fz{. Now hee's put toor, ſhe is Vr ſinis miſtreſſe. As he is Borgia,hecan have no Prerence to oppoſe him, if he diſcover And be ¶ Aurelio agen, he deſtroyes all Hope for himſelſe, for I perceive hee s taken with her I know by the motion of his noſe, which pants Like the Bellowes of an Organ,
Dyrſ. Sir your fathers
Voyce ſpeakes in yours, you now command my deſtinie If you will make me happy.
Bo. Noble Sir, = | I am ſorry where ſuch in finite merirs plead I have no power to ſerve your noble wiſhes, And keepe the honour of a gentleman,
Urſ. Your family I take it can receive No ſtaine by my alliance.
Bo. Twere a bleſſing.
Fiſ. How will he come off?
Bo, Miſtake not I be ſeech you, I have already erigaged my ſelfe to a Gentleman Of a noble houſe in CMillan,one Arelio Andreoxxi.
Piſ. Thats himſelfe.
Bo, Who on the ſight of , Her picture which — + n
To wooe the ſubſtance ſor him, promi To follow me in perſon, being one To whom I had many obligations
Ofa gentleman, to aſſiſt his faire defires, Ifin few dayes he come to Vrbin, but
I Tam confident kis young affections -- - u o W hich had no ot her life but what a dead en $802
Repreſentation could infuſe,will ſobne Vaniſh agen, and leave.me tobe ſerviceable In what you will command me, and be ſure
Iwill not racke your patience to much lengj; «4
In the Millan Court, I paund che credit e
7h Opporiumitie. | Tf in few dayes he a bow 2 2
Ay 3 diſobliged
Hy abilitles to . a tn hes — *
It will become my gratitude. Urſ. You ſpeake nobly. 8 Bo. The pleaſures of the Court will ſo abate
His thoughts this way, that I preſume your Lorditp
Will ſoone be maſter of that amorous province
You ayme at, and much honour your poore ſervants: tf. Let this conſirme I am yours. Piſ. So ſo, this was indiſſereatly well carried, I was jealous |
Of a more lame come off. eien
- "Urſ. Adde this one
To your other prince ly favours Madam and
Admit this gentleman to kiſſe your hand. Du. Without much ſuite my heart woule have conveyed
That to my lip, a very handſome gentleman,” - Cor, What ſayd the Dutche ſſe *>doe not her eyes fix-
Upon my hn ? how now Cornelia,
1 amhis fiſters fiſter, yet I had 80
No acquaintance with this turbulent paſſions N
When I laſt ſaẽ him. n
—
Mer, What does her menge She | 7 eye dies — way $713 9 34 . I *
Bo. And wonder bar kr nothing jo hereyes 1 * To be afraid of. R024
Piſ. If the Datcheſſe ſhould be in love widkhim- 18 4813 0 Here were a purchaſe, I doe verily ' 146 Do | (31985 1 $6 (i * ares 0 Dec, l If he have but the ef N This ſervice a vome, ſin pon h 7 Well Aurelio Andyeo 182 $9 bla. "£4 You ma 2 Nr,: wo Ile bring « Ladder colts Mew SHE prot 1 855 5
And then the cown's our © Mer. Cerndiacanſt Serbe r. Her grace in vem ple
2 ; Y avian +þ TE 12110 A 5 1 5 4 3 7 3 * - « 7
>: = 1
a . 4 : * 4 2 : * - a & = 3 i . * ST . :
The Opportunities
Be patient. : |
Pi/, She plales with him, good, better, I. is your ſpit ĩt up my nimble Dutcht ſſe, Would I had the conjuring ef it downe, Vrſini Lookes like a whelpe had loſt his taile alreadie.
Urſ, I was j:alous ſhe would chide and frowne upon him, piaid her be gentle, and looke calme, Iſt come To this. | |
Du. Vr ni, I have thought how to ſupply That place of Secretary that is vacant, ſec That Bergia be ſworne, we apprehend His fitne ſſe. |
Vrſ. Madam.
Ds, I hope this will pleaſe you
. V-rſeni, we can grace whom you preſent ;
He is more gentleman than to forget How for your ſake we honor him; I (ball Betray too much of women, Borgia Attends us; come Cornelia, Vi ſons, Merentio, make the Court not ſo much ſtranger. Sa cunt. Bo. llc follow y: what doſt thinke of this Piſ aura. Piſ. I thinke the Dutcheſſe loves thee, and make nfe on t, Loſe no applications, thar't her Secretary, A degree to more inward indeerements, If ſhe doe love thee, and Bo. What prethce? Piſ. Shee knowes beſt | What appetite (he hae, let me counſell thee, Be not modeſt, we arc made. Hor. What? . Piſ. Thy father a Count, thou a Duke, Vrſin. A Coxcombe, Ia fine gentleman, and one That would be glad of the worlt of your New female acquaintances. | | Bo. There are no faces here. Piſ. Be not you a Tyrant, Ile doe pennance ” In a white ſhcete with thy ſiſter for t. Exeant,
l
The Opportunitie. Aim Secundus.
Enter Pimponio,
Pim. Na jor Aurelio come yet? No maſter to be heard
on, he is a fine Gentleman to uſe his Squire O this faſhion z where ſhould he be, hee commanded me not to bee drunke, he is drunkeʒ and drunke and dead drunke, hee wou!d have had the grace to reele home to his lodging before this time of night elſe: let me ſee, whar if the flcth have led him a co fide? He is falne into ſome brake, ſome wench has tyed him by the legges, and nothing elie can excuſe him to me; yer now 1 thinke on t, he does forget Pimpenio, he was not wont to be his owne purveyor, my art for the choice of his Pullin, has beene allow d if he doe ger and fo forth an excuſe for Phyſicke, and come home founderd, the diſeaſe was none of my choo- ſing, ir came not through my office; ſtay, what if my Signior be dead ? umph? dead? my heart mĩigives, they may be kild, my maſter has the ſpirit of fighting in him, and his companion. is the Divell at it, an agler hole or two in their hearts, and in a ſtrange place, my Signiors, are never miſt, tis ſo, if he bee dead — bring forth the Pore-Mantue.
Euter Aſcanio, a Bry,
Aſe. Sir?
Pim, Bring forth my Port- mantue my demĩtive knave, and tell thy father I would ſpeake with him, he is dead, he would not have truſted me fo long with his mony elſe, now will I make my ſelſe his heire,defiethe world and Azrelior Ghoft, but firſt of all muſt outface mine hoaſt, fo let me examine; very
good lynings, bagge and baggage, you are mine owne, Enter Aſca.
Thy father call bim hither, Aſ. He is comming Sir, tis very late. im. Never too late to tell money, fetch me a brace of gen- nets I will mount em, a Covey of Curtefins; ſtay Pimponio, be not mad before thy time, who ſhall Iſay I am?a Prince at leaft; Ihave it; ner Gruß.
Here
. - a - ay * #..&T * Ll 2 = _—_ * 4 — — — 3 » 2 — — 2 — oY 9 ws . MN, * — ry 2327 , 1 , 0 — — — — * : my a 4 * 8 1 .
The Opportunities Here comes mine Hoſt,
Gr, What would this fellow have: no newes of your maſter?
Pim. Speake that word no more on thy allegiance, here goe
to bed and rife with a cleane ſhirt.
Gr, This is gold, what does the fellow meane?
Pim. No fellowes neither, tis time to ſhew my ſelſe, where
is thy boy?
Aſ. Here Signior.
Pim. Kusele downe and aske me bleſſ
Aſ. This does lookeablefling,fhall 1 ake another?
Pim, Aske any thing but what Iam,
Aſ. YOU are
Pim, Stay there, cis dangerous to pronounce me yet, Iwill
be ſtill diſguild y men are Went.
Aſ. Your men.
Pim. Thou art wile, thine eare, I am a Prince.
Gr. How Signior.
Pim, The reaſon of my ſhape thou ſhat know hereafrer, thus
Tove has beene diſguiſd. Aſ. Is not your name Pimponiof Pim. It was my pleaſure they ſhould call me ſo, I have not found em truſtie; How fares the Dutchefle?
Ale What doe heare ?
Pim, This boy ſhall waite on me, Ile have yee all.
Gr. Whether ?
Pim. What.Countrey hall I chooſe? to be a Prince of Ia. hi is too well knowne, Spaine ſtands convenient, and far enough, where I have beene too, [le have you all to Spaive,
Aſ. What to doe Signior?
Pim, For your preferments, when chou haſt got a een for this tub thou liv ſt in, let me know t.
Gr. Boy this a Spaniſh Prince. LESS.
Aj. A Prince of Oranges, he a Spaniſp Prince?
Pim, They wonnot travell thicher to'diſptovenie;totellthe truth, I ſuſpe&t my to Groomes have . me; 1 come hi- tber to be ſuitor to your Dutcheſk,
Aſ. In theſe cloathes?
4 _
" 2 1 mm, * -
Your othierfellowcal'd Si His perſon ſtands diſcover' To court our Durcheſſe,he haspromild us At his returne to Spaiue to
The Opperumniue.
Pin. Lou doe not know iny plot, 1 922 vants ſhould cunningly have preſer d mee to be tbe Dur Foole. Gr. Her Foole?ris very likely. Pim, But for a time,there's myſtery i in that By this meanes I refolv'd to try her nature NE And diſpoſicion ere I married her, 1 For I can have at this preſent ſoure Ki daughters, the eldeſt of em is but ſeven yeares old, which —— the parents - dote upon me, and wod make ſure of me berimes.
Gr. Idoe beleeve your grace.
Fim. Grace, umph, thou muſt be advanc'd, let me ſee, what office, oh, thou ſhalt have a place at my returne in the Gallies, doſt heare, a yerking m.
Af. And what ſhall I bee?
Pim. Thou ſhalt bea Picaro, in yourlanguage a Page, my chiefe Picaro; by degrees you may fend for all your Licks I will ſee them mounted.
Emer Piſauro, . | Piſ. Where's Piomponio, (min. Pim, A pox Pimpe you, they are alive en, now am 115 dead Piſ. There is a certaine moveable ecclip d aP ort · mantue. Pim, Wod your tongue had beene clip'd.
Piſ. Wberein there are ſome golden friends of ours.
Pim, All yourfriends are well
Piſ. Let me ſee their complexions, where are they? ? looke
for the Signior your maſter a moneth hence?
Aſ. His maſter de e obſerve? | Pim, Does hee not carry it hanſomely, bee wits wet
have diſcovered my ſelfe to you. | (guiſe?
Af. Wich your oc Ie Sir,is not this Signior a basal Fiſ. A Prince Puppets,who 2 jmpopio ?
Af. - And you one of his — yh *
3 he came hither
make us G
Pi Has he betrayd W —
and tans... Ai
The Opportunt tie. Ef pleafe your excellence, Pim, Away, way. 8
Pif. A Prince cannot be hid tho under mountaines, But my deere Prince, the bagges muſt goe with me While you keepe ſtate ith Inne.
Pim. Who Rall miintaine,
Piſ. If I didthinke thou wouldſt carry it hanſomly.— Well, Ile excuſe thee to thy maſter, here
When thou haſt domineerd away this bagge Thou maiſt heare more; keepe thine owne counſell, and Thy maſter ſhannot owne thee, if thou haſt Any fagary,drinke,and indulge thy Genius; Le fee thee agen before thy raigne be out, No words but be a prinee, and ſcorne to know us And ſo I take leave of your excellence.
Pim. I ſhannot know my ſelfe, am not I a Prince Indeed, that have beene long conceald ? this is a bagge And full of golden fr ĩends, umph, however I will Spend it like an Emperour, theſe are not robes Eit for a Prince I take it, Gruti i, boy Ientertaine you both my Groome and Page, and Say unto you, Snakes goe caſt your coatesʒ Here's earneſt for new skins, when things are ripe We will to Court.
Gr. What thinkes your grace of going to bed
Pim. I am too ſober, let the whole houſe be drunke firſt, 'twill pleaſe us well to ſee the ſervants gamboll, we purpoſe To be drunke our ſelves in Rate too: |;
Let me have fiftie ſtrumpets. Gr. Fiftie trumpets. Pin. Strumpets I fay,they'Tmake the greater noiſe.
"Aſc Tour grace willhe a Hereules. |
Pin. I will, and thou ſhale be Capraine of the Pigmies un der
me, this roome 's too narrow, beate downe the walls on both -
ſides, advance your fights audl call the Country in, if there be a Taylor amongſt em he ſhall firſt take meaſure. of my higineſſe, for I muſt not longer walke in Quo. u. Neg ! Both, We attend your excelleucee :- Extunt. Euter Julio and Lucid. Ls, Tme ſoſt ith wonder Es. 5 2: . | A
— - WA Ste * =
— <o- 4 — | |
ch — —
.. „„ Oe
he Opportumitie. K Iu. 4 firan e turne by rom that could temper we imagin In her Highneſſe.
Lu. Thaveheard ofcharmes and philters,
Iv, If travell have theſe glorious Leffe Ile abroad too.
Lu, He has a hanſome
Is, And diſcourſes grant it.
Le. Is maſter ofa noble ſoule. | | Is, Soule, nay let that alone, Ladies doe took After the ſoule ſo much, the body will ſervetheir Turne, ſo it be nimble, and at their devotion,
perſon.
If you obſerve, he is grac d by all the Ladies minion,
As if he were their
I doe not like his ſiſters eyes u
They whirle too much and ſeem d to ſhoot an envie
Vpoa the Dutcheſſe favors. Lu. I am confident
Thou haſt no murmer in thy thoughts againſt him, Ts, Ibut expreſſe my wonder,
In that I thinke the whole Court had a ſhare:
He knowes I love him,twill become his feare
How to ſecure Ur, Lu. He bt read | Firſt to her hi Is. Not with expectation To be ſupplanted,I make queſtion | If the humor hold,wherher (hee may not marry him, That'sa round higher then her favorite: Had hope to climbe. Lu. Although I honour Bogis
And wiſh him — advanc'd,I wodnot . |
Kneele to him, my voyce is for Ferrara He is a Prince, I wod not for my ſtate This ſhod breake off histreatie.
Is, Thy Embaſſador BY end
To his 4 is ſcarce mündedl. 8 *
. Lu, Come ſhe cannat, 5c SES —
*
- K ku 1 4 1 * 4 = "4 "A A 25 *
% * 1 ,
= * WS hs Y a> <> ow 4 — — WW 2 % " 3 -
- * 2 — — . — - - 6
__—
The Opportunits *
Fall ſo low, the paſſion is too violent D Enter Urſini : To laſtewho are theſe? and Ferrara.
Is. The Embaſſadour and Vrſini, whats the matter ⸗ I feare ſome diſconter . Urſ. My Lord ler gn Prevaile fo farre, I hope you imagine Am firme to you, I have more cauſe tobe Impatient,my whole ſtrength ar Court a concernd, © But have more noble thoughtsrhien' to - *
1144
-
12 be ſliglite pai tts b *r juſtice to your cauſe, and royall matter P ut on no * of en ale And ke how things will cloſe Fer. Tis an affront _* n Bove ſatisfaction, but the diſgrace Reflects beyond my perſon. Urſ. Had lhe ſtadied Honours to his ambition, it had 8 Not wrong d her prudence, to have ſhewne you more ReſpeR. . Fer. But Iwas not con erable; 1 The- oung Gentleman had taken up her eye, Her tongue, her feete, her underſtanding too, I might have witherd in my ſeate, no beame, No di ſcourſe this way, but that once ſhe was pleafd - To aske me how I lik d che gallanzsdancjug, - Ile not diſturbe her revels. Y. Yet my Lor | Have ſo mucfforcitude,)twiltbe 2meines If you returne, to make her finde her errour To your perſon, were ſhe not my P rinceſſe I ſhould profeſſe my ſelfe aſham d, bur come Let me beſeech you to gᷣbe backe leave not The preſence ſo, ſor your owne honour Sir Obſerve a little more, I hope you ſhannot Repent my counſell. ach Fer. I wod ye wod excuſe me, Ifhall but vex my eyes. J Expect a change,
Fer.
The Opportunitie.
Fer, You have power with me my Lord.
Urſ. You honour me.
In. What will become o this, what thinke you now? They doe reſent it, and for ought I heare "4 Have little hope ro mend it.
Lx. Can ſhe be In love fo ſoone, well Borgia, if this Hold, Ile applaud thy fate.
Iu. For aſter this Allowance, hee l be Duke of Vrbin to morrow, Give thee joy bully, let me ſee if he Turne Prince, tis beſt for us turne beggers.
Lu. Begger ???
In. Court beggers, Heel deny us nothing, Now for ſome witty knave to finde our ſuits, I muſt keepe ſome in penſion for that purpoſe,
They are profitable vermine, Enter Piſauro. His companion.
Piſ. Save you Gentlemen, what de'e meane? Why ſtand yee bare ?
Lu. In being Borgis friend It will become us.
In. He knowes no title yet,
But chiefe ſecretary to her highneſſe, what honours - Are in her breſt laid up for him, we know not
He has a mounting fate, and in his we P ronounce you happy. Piſ. We ſhall all be Princes
In time; but Gentlemen lets be more familiar We thinke ſo well of things, does he preſerve The Dutcheſſe ſmile, or does ſheuſe to make . At ſome time o' the Moone ſport with her ſubjects.
Iu. You are wide all the heaven Sir, had you come A little ſooner you had heard diſcourſe, " Enter Borgia. To cleare your doubt, hee's here himfelfe. . We, Pillars, ih Io OMA [1
What will become on's, tis as thou ſaiſt? Pij, Whit prethee?
an ,
D3 .
—
—  —C__Þ__
The Oppoͤrtunitie.
Jo. The Dutcheſſe is mad.
Piſ. How !
Bor. Why the is certainly in love, ſhat in and ſec - ö How I am ns'd, and yet I now come forth 1 To recover breath, I ha danc d my ſelſe to a jellie, |
The Ladies ha no mercy;but the Dutcheſſe pPiſ. What prethee.
Bo, Is as I told thee mad, I prethee counſell me Alcho her grace be pleaſd to ſhew me favors | 'T were boldneſſe to beleeve, and thanke her.
Piſ. How? I hope thou art not mad,
Bo. Iknow not whether The fit will laſt, I may hold ſome proportion With dee ſuppos d ſiſter,
Poore wretch does caſt ſuch ſpeaki es upon me As ſhe were Iealous of che Duchelte — 195 | And wrings me by the hand when I dance with her, N
The Dutcheſſe love, thy ſtarres ordaind thee for her; Ile make a ſhift with Cornelia, locke high And proſper, when th' art a Duke, I ſay no more Bo. What ſhalPs doe with Pimpanio ? that foole May betray all, Piſ. He isa Prince before you I ha made him ſure, and ſwolne him into a pride, le ſhall not know you, but of that hereafter, Away and pleaſe the Dutcheſſe. Enter Dutcheſſe, Ladies, Ferrara, Dyſini. Bo. Your graces pardon * | Du. 'Tis late, good night my Lord Embaſſador. Exit, | Fer, Tis well I am bid goodnight, yet all my hopes * Vaniſh in miſts, wlrat chinke you now coſin ? | 1 | Ve
| Enter Pietro, | | Pie. The Dutcheſſe Sir calls for you. 5 Bo, I attend z 6 | What were I beſt codoe ? ; + Piſ. Doſt make a queſtion 5 | Loſe not the fortune that's preſented in |
The Opportunit To Urſ. Iknow not what to chinke,ler me waite on Toyour lodgings, | Fer. They joyne coth' Court. Vrſ. Tis the leſſe ſervice. Fer, To morrow morning if I may be honor d Wich your preſence, I will impart a ſecret to yon, And be happy in your Counſell. | Urſ. I obey Any commands, Fer. For this time give me pardon, goodnight my Lord. E Urſ, A happy night to your Lordſhip, After fo many yeares ſpent in the Courr, Iam to learne the tricke ont, theſe are actions Gainſt my firſt rules, I am ignorant Of chis nem Court philofopk, what ſhould” The Duteheſſe meane, ſo prodigall of her graces To one the ſcarſe remembers, with ſuch open Neglect to th Dukes Embaſſador / Iwas carefull She wod not uſe him kindely enough, wert not Affection to his fiſter, lyes up my Revenge, Ide drop it on his heart, but I Muſt worke with art, and by a Counter magicke Diffolve his ſpell, or forme him to my purpoſe. Enter Laura and Melinds, You have beene waiting on the Dutcheſſe Ladies Lax, She diſmis'd us. Dy. Wick what circumſtance? Is ſhe ſtill pleaſant⸗ Mel. Strangely altered | Since young Borgsatooke his leave and melancholly : : - Vrſ. What Madam ? od Mei. Sheele ſcare ſleepe 8 To night, for dreaming oth Gentleman... Vrſ. He is gone then? | Lau. Tes, we ſaw his depatture my Lord, He kiſt us both, but we put forward ſirſt, He is the hanſomſt Gentleman; dee rhinke - =P He weares his owne haire ? . 17
1
you |
Fer. There is no ſnch affliction to the ſoule
Al Ava bort To aske him once, but thought he was modeſt And wod ha bluſhd, I wod I had his pĩdture. Drſ. His ſubſtance Madam, but take heede, the Dutcheſſe Muſt have no rivall, how dee affe& his ralke ? ; Lau. That was not my part to obſerve,we did divide | Our P rovences,cach Lady tooke a member To examine,when we have conferd our notes Ile tell yee what the body of Ladies thinke on him. Ate, Nay wee l take him apeeces ere we ha done. Urſ. And who ſhall ſer him together agen? my Ladies I waite on you. | | | Lau. Your Lordfhip will coo much honour us. | Urſ. 'Tis the way to my ownelodging, .  - Mel. If it were not the way wy Lotd,your Lord(hip Could not be deſtiiute ofa lodging at Court. Urſ. Your Charitie would releeve me, uſe my ſervice, Exit. Enter Ferrara and Pietro with a light. |
As that which ſhould preſerve it, love, a paſſion That with conſent betrayes our underſtanding, And leaves man but a heape of flame and ruins; I was fafe till I had ſeene her, buſie fame Tooke but poſſeſſion of my eare, my owne Raſhneſſe and vanitie engagd my perſon - - - To ſee what was commended,and I ſuffer for t, Leave me.
Pie, Tis darke my Lord. Fer. Thoulyftis light And by theſe fires I ſee too much, away, I ſhall ſoone reach my lodgings, night and I Shall agree well together, if my ſtag Be long, remember that you leſt me under The pallace winde wes, leave to be officious 3
And obey me till this nighe ſhe gave me faire Exit, Reſpe&,and ſeem d roallow the loving treatie, |
I wasdull not to uncloud me all this while The knowledge of wy perſon had engagd her
Have ſome appointment. Song.
1 4 F
Beſide my aft of love, and ſo much confidetice 1 27 Paſt all — the is a woman, W hoſe nature is unſteady as the waves,
Vpon which fooliſh man runnes deſperate To mea ruine, Enter Borgis)
1 — Fortune thou ſmilſt too much, I ſhall ſuſpect
hy giddineſſe, take eyes to thee and ſee Toca a flattering height thou haſt exalted
A 18 rod man. Fer. What voice is that, it had A ſound of melancholy, —— 5 Bor. But why make Iridiculous application 33 To fortune? love is onely active here; ett 1 The tyrant love, more blinde then chance, l am Full of diſtraction, there's a labyrinth Wichin, and more I tread, the more Iimloſt 5 the Dutcheſſe and Cornelis My ſoule divids, I malt not be a foole, And for the fable of amorous love Leave fate that courts me with a glorious cle, And yet Cornelia is fury, and Jookes Wirhall the charmes of love upon her brow, What will che doe when ſhebeleeves lam
No brother? ot a ;
Fer. Tis the new ague B That ſhakes the cour 1 he talkes To himſelſe,a Iigbr irikes from che Durcheſſe window
And muchke;lle obſerve, th 4 nd mucſike; erve, the gallant may 3
Bo. Alas poore love ficke Lady: what if l e
Attempted farther, the excuſe will fall
More eaſie on a ſtranger, Lady, hift.
Cor, Whoe's that ? Bo, One that does wiſh the happineſſ To ſee your face, you have bleſt my cares already; Cor. What are you? Bo. My name 's Borgia,if you be
Affaire one of the court, time is not old 1
Since I was a gueſt there.
— n
, jy yr ny 50 3 ; .
„%
Cor. Tis he, Ile not loſe This opportunitie,Sir your boldne ſſe Speakes you a ſtranger, and in part excuſes Vouare alone.
Bo, Im. Cor, I expeX not Vpon fo ſmall acquaintance you ſhould know My voyce agen, I am the Dutcheſſe Sir.
Bo. Your graces humble creature, may I hope
You'l pardon this attempt.
Cor. Vpon condition Tou will forger:the freedome of our nature And not grow inſolent upon our favours,
We were late pleas d toſhew you,'rwas not love But mirth, we meant our court the wantonneſſe
Ofreveling nights,which we retirements Know — — and e ia men, That dare licentioufly apply to our Diſhonour:if your ſervice in that place
Of ſecretary we have nam d you for
Be diligent and fairhfull, we t not | That choiſe,but on your life feede no ambition Higher, it will be a degree neut treſonn To us, and the honour of Ferrara Duke, With whom becauſe you are our ſecretary We let you knam our
Reſoly'd 0 my deſiret. u 1 11K
nme you gone Sir?
Sleepe wiſely if you can, we ſhall expect Vour attendance in the morning, but no On forfeit of your life bey ond whats dutie. Fer, I have enough to morrow I reſolve To be my ſelſe, and with a ſtate becomming Ferraro Dukebullenge this happineſſe,
Forgive deare Princeſſe I ſuſpected thee, Zxie,
Enter Dutehe ſſe above,
Cor. The Dutcheſſe ſbee I ſpoyle all.
ats are frxt to marry, Fer. What bleſſing hath my care tooke in? ſhe is
thought
_X
ww r OY „* —
a oy — — — . — K. FR ann. tibetan areal.
Burmuft not trouble you tochovſe my husba dz It isthe Dutcheſſe pleaſure, I ſhould marry .
Dat. Theard your voyce more loud then uſuall, Whom ſpake you body ape Cor. Heer's no and plea grace. | Dut. Yeu hold ſome dialogue — window then, Ile know. Cor. My brother Borgia Madam. Dut. Bergia, leave us. Cor. I hope hee's gone: Vo. I muſt confeſſe you are my Princeſſe Madam, To whoſe leaſt command Iowe my blood and fortune. Dat, He ſpeaks to me, how does he know I am here? Bo, And doe not thinke I can be loft fo much In dutĩe to interpret there was any thing In me, that could deferve more then your paſtime; And let me fall and dye beneath your anger, When I tranigreſſe ſo farre, as to forget My humble fate which onely can be bleſt With my obedience to you, I had not One ſawcie application of your favours, My heart tall bleed to death ere ic (hall ſinde One thought of ſo much impudence. Dut. Howes this ? + | Since Cornelia has uſurped my name And frighted him, what ſhould make her officious He is her brother, I muft heare no more Ofthis——you are miſtaken all this while, I am Cumelia your fiſter. Bo. Is the Dutcheſſe gone? Dut. You well diſtinguiſh voyces, yet ſhee s gone. Bo. My joy of ſoule, deereſt Cornelis. Tis ſhe that I muſt truſt to. e Ds. Iſt e en ſo⸗ N : - Deare brother, leaving all your ſtudied complements I doe not like your dilatory reaſonns 5% To Vrſini, I may heare you as abrother,
Vr ſini, an advancement more then I | eee e ee e "SF FEUD
—— —
— 8
The Opportunitis. And ſet your heart at relt how ere ITſeeni d
Inclining, deſtinie is not more fixt, Then the affection I owe Dyſini, Him I reſolve to marry, and before The next daies light is waſted,
Bo, I am undone A'both fides, heare me yet bur ſpeake. Dat, What would you ſay brother ? Bo, Tam not thy brother.
Dut. How, not Bot Bo. Not Borgia the whole towne's niiftaken
My name is Aurelio Andreoz.z3,
I was borne in Millan, with my frienddefign' d To ſee ſome ſervice in the German warres,
At the firſt fight J muſt confeffe I lov'd thee: | To enjoy — converſation more freely,
I was content to ſeeme what men would call me
Dut, You tell me wonders.
Zo. I cangive thee proofe,
But to no p _—_ now, and tell thee too Enough to thee thinke Imay be worthy,
But — tis ſo, I am glad you ha diſcover d Your reſolution ſo ſoone, good night te e, Ile make no noyſe to momem when Itake
My journey. Du. Stay, he muſt not be fo loſt,
— 5 is a ſtrange diſcovery, if you can eftimony that you are not Borgia,
Nor yet _ of any noble wayes That may reward your good opinion,
Tislate;a lovers dreatne' charme all your ſenſes, .
And waking e our wiſhes i you pleaſe 1 Vatill Iaske a er fax] ation, | | Be fill concea H. v1 vn 2}; Bo, There may boli, althou
My firſt love I confeſſe refle& on thi is,
TheDurcheſſs yet, had not beene muckamiſfe,
t Tou not Sir yea your coinming hither; 5
..
Exit.
* 1
fo
” . The Opportunities. q 4 * =" | 9 11424 Fer, l 5 1/1 N 14 | TR |
Adu Tertiu. cr. F 7X V. i ſhall hardly take thee for my owthe hat-
A. Let me alone with my Don, if I do not fit him let me never linde the way into my owne breeches agen, Iwould be loath to die in a wrong caſe and bee miſtaken in another world; is the muſicke ready, and the wine father? can the fellowes doe their dance hanſomely, in ſtead ofa maske to entertaine his highneſſe, Iam ſorry my legges are out of tune, 1 have a great minde to be capering.
Gr. My owne wit, my owne naturall wit to a haire.
Aſ. Not too much haire of your owne, and wit togetſſer, fa- ther, tis not the faſhion:de heare,whatſoever I ſay, be you drunk time enough to juſtiſie it, the bills ſhall be diſcharged without ſcrupulous examination, ſowſe in wine and give him Sea roome, if his head leake we will pumpe his breeches, he fhall not finke with all his ballaſt I warrant him. | a
Gr. A witty cracke, and my owne boy ſtill. EL
Aſ. Your owne boy? take what you ſay, leſt you bee driven to juſtifie it, you have no minde to wake my mother from her grave, tis enough I atke you bleſſing, I doe long to be metamorphoſd,and purſue his princely humor out of breath ——' Muficke, tis well, his grace is upon entrance. 3
Gr. Diſpatch boy. Af. I know my cue to enter. Ex#, Euter Pimponio, lilę a Spaniſh Den, and Servantr.
Pim, And how, and how doe things become? We were in
clouds bur now. | ;
Gr. Vour highneſſe is broken out.
Pim, Broken out, where ?
Gr. Out of the clouds and pleaſe you.
Pim, There is no infidell among you then,
Von all beleeve I ama Prince, de'e heare,
At all adventures let ir goe no further,
There are no traytors Ihope amongſt yew
The Opportumitie. | Gr. Traytors,we will cut off any mans necke that dares but thinke ſo. Fuer an. | Fim. Doe and I will juſtiße ir, hang necks among friends, although I am pleaſd to reveale the majeſtic of my perſon to you, it is not firevery one ſhould know ſo much, ycuare ftran.. gersand therefere I dare truſt you, but the Dutchefſe muſt not heare on t upon your lives; ſhe and Imuſt be ac quainted when I ſee my time; Ile tell yon, the toy may take me i ch head to looke like a ſoole agen, it may, greatneſſe is given to humore, and giddineſſe will rume in a blood, if it doe, doe not know me Gr. For what? Pin. For any other then ſeeme. „55 SS ned DEE Ge bs Pim. Thou art an aſſe, a Prince may play the foole within his owne dowinions, or any other; provided they bee of his owneallies and confederates: Iknow where I am, but we are not metrryreach me a chaire anda bottle of wine, every one take
his charge, Gr, Will not your highneſſe have the dance farft ?
Pim. They will dance the better when they are three quar- ters drunke. | 1. Ser. We do nat obſerve men of your nation to be ſo joviall Pim. Not ſubje&s I grant you that, but we Sound a heath, kave privlledge muſique, and give fire at once ſo, but me thinkes ic were neceſſary there were ſome difference in bees x n all are not Princes, reach me a bigger bottle, © Sound a health, I will preſerve my ſtate, this is a Princely | draught : we drinke alone. ſo Why have we not a Concubine? 2. Ser. Brave P rince, with what a majeſtie he drinkes. Pim, Now let em friske the dance you have prepard, I am ready to: ccept it. Gr. And it fhall pleaſe your grace, The dance whichended. There is a high German deſires to ſpeak with you. Enter Grur. 1. Ser. The high German that was at Court, hee's a man of mightie parts and kaowne to all the Princes in Chriſtendome,
whatcomes hefor ? | Gr. Tfeare you are betrayd Sir, and that the Dutcheſſe has
ſeut for you. .
— ̃ a oo —
The 0 re.
Pim, For me, I wonnot come yet.
2. Ser. Doe not affront him Sir or yourowne fk, this bigh German has beaten all the Fencers in Europe.
Pim. Ler him beateall the wild, whats that to me? ſhall he
make a prize of me?
Gr, Butifhe come Embaſfador from the Dutcheſſe.
Pim. That's another matter, give me the tother botthe--- Now let all the Cantons of wiſſe come. | | Enter Aſcanio in Swizyes babit. | . . is the high German ? let me ſeehim. | | . Thar Sir. (upon. Hl Hee's one of the loweſt high Germans that e' re] lookd | Aſ. 1 kifle thy highneſſe hand,
1 Pim, And we a this lownefle: dee heare Si ir,are yon
23 f a high German?
80 | Aſ. I was fo at the beginning of the warres, what wee are |
oy
- © Rog 3 OW
beaten to you may diſcerne. Pim. Are you beaten to that ?youl be a very lice ration 1 and the warres continue, 1% A. I have a meſſage to deliver you,
Ihe faire Duteheſſe of Vrin, whom I waite on,
| Hexringaperſonof your blood and quaticie
| So meanely lodg d, by me deftres you would |
Accept an entertainement in her Court. Chard? 2 |
i
Pim. We give the Dutchefle thankes, en knew bee Las Aſ. It was impoſſible
You ſhould ſtay undiſcover d many howers. -
| Princes have firange intelligence, nd you may
7 As ſoone tie up the Sunnebeames in a net
As keepe your ſelfe unknowne;for my owne part | Tam honord in the embaſſie,and ſhall
! Be proud to write my ſelſe your penſioner | As I am to all the royall blood in Chriſtendome,
A. | Pim, O P enſioner, tis the leaſt honour we intend thee, T am F- ' | anaturall Prince as ſure as live; here weare this gold, there's ot | moretodrinke our health, wee are pleaſd no'man be ſober at & our returne, as he will anſwer it, you may be all my ſubjeRts:if
I marry the Dutcheſſe Ile hang 25 all.
0%.
„ „„
Orſ. How ? Be
Pim. In chaines of , drinke lay and drinke to
ſe, what will become of menow? ſtay, a word with you
Fagh German what will de Dunchefſe doe with me doe you thinke⸗
A. "Twere ſinne to ſay ſhee I honour you, ſor you Are *. — addition but her love; : a Your wit your blood, yaur perſan,doe not toſs The opportunitle, yet I Tou will be affronted.
. Pim. No matter, I ha bene affroned a hundred cimes, ba
whom / Aſ. Queſtionleſſe by ſome grea ones, And perhaps beaten. 790 40 (11 935.2 Pim. Thavebrene beaten too upon goedoccaſi jon,
And will agen — fave my honour;bearen ? I can taker —— this pare Lamin — icke is cat away!
Aſ. If you be valiant and indure, it will Engage her love the more, hut I know Your breeding will afford you impudence To overcome 3 = 00160110ev * This Dukedome to your Elkegoe onbollly, My cbimſell (hall —
Zaun I will on, and fears no beating, well I cannot knight thee, yet prove but a witch Ile make thee one of my prĩvy counſello rm. Exit. Enter JAercutio, Julio ail Butio. I Mer. No more, my dutie will aot let me  heare it. Ls, How not your dutie Sir? + + You are notangry}  ..:
Aer. Youare hisfriends,I ſhould not elſc be pleas d.
Lu. We have ſiid nothiag to afflict you chus, We did expect this wod ha made you merry.
Is. A ſonnes preferment was not wont to be Such diſcord to a father, a loving father, For ſo we tooke your conſtitution.
Lu. P referment?cis too poore a word.
aA,
The
Mer. You were beſt tell me too he may be Duke. Ix. He is thode, I know not how bee l mifle it. Afer. This is three quarters treaſom tho I love My ſonne, l muſt not cheriſh this ambition. In, But it will be more then three
It you preſume to checke the Dutch
treaſon
che Darchelle pleaſure, And murmur thus if ſhe reſolve to marry,
And make your ſonne a Dube, yon 'I not turne rebell. Mer. Deſend allegiance, Gentlemen mitiake not Altho I love my ſonne, Ile not be guiltie
Ofany thought to croſſe her, but I ould
Be forry he ſhould caſt away himfelte; Is. Now de e meane?? Mer. As men doe uſe when they Doe hange or drowne themſelves. Lu. Have you fence
And talke thus wildly, Au. Yes and underſtand
The riddles you have told me, | Lu. Doe you count | We
Your ſonne loſt by the Dutcheſſe loving him ?
Her, Goe finde your wits agen, and uſe em better, Can you be ſo rediculous to thinke, So wiſe, ſo modeſt, ſo religious A Lady can forget her ſtate and honour To place affection on my ſonne. There have beene Prefidents to make ir ſeeme no wonder,
Mer. She had better taine his head off, there had ended My cares, the boy tꝰrunne madde, and what can follow Thinke yee ? goe to, Ile toher highneſſe preſently.
Is. What to doe?
Aer. To pray her leave him to a naturall death, And chooſe ſome other to undoe with pride Of her large favours;gentlemen examine But your ſelves, could either of you two promiſe To keepe your wits, if ſuch a grace were offerd To you? would it not tempt you to be mad, To thinke of being a Duke / = honeftly,
Iſt ft indeed you ſhould be leſſe than mad ?
There be ſome men ith world ha loſt their ſenſes
When they but chewd the Cud of a bare Lordſhip,
Tha knowne a knighthood has turn d forme mens wits,
The very noyſe o tn ſpurres;then doe not blame we
If I defire my ſonne ſober and ſenſible,
And now I thinke onꝰ t Ile firſt feeke him out. Exit,
Enter Laura and Melinda, *
Lu. Icthinke the old mans mad indeed,
Deare Madam Laura, Lau. Sweet Sir I cannot ſtay. Lu. Then Jean walke and waite on you. Exit, Ts. You have the fame haſte too,
Thou art a peece of the Dutcheſſe Cabinet,
I muft heare ſome newes. Ae. Alas the Court is barren. Ti. Tknow a tricke to make thee fruitfull yet,
Nay Ican mend my pace Lady an you put me toot. Fit. f Lover Cadet Pile, Cor. Good Sir the reaſon why you wonder at me Above all other women, what in we Appeares ſo full of prodigie. Pf; Ile tell you, Y are young and hanſome. Cer, Should I grant J were, This were no miracle, Piſ. Wichall this youth and hanſomneflc y are a maid And live at Court too, this I hope's not ordinary. Cor. What wonder will your fancy create next. Piſ. V are ſound too, or your phiſnomy decei ves me. Cor. The priviledge of my brothers friend muſt nat
Engage me toa mockery.
Piſ. I was
About to ſay y are patient too, I ſee
Something wud make you angry, but returne To your firſt temper, and Fle ſoone acquaint you With all my purpoſe Lady,toall the Commendations,which meet not in all women,
vo u
——ẽ —— —— , ne - *
The Opportunitze, You have birth and fortune, and the favourof The Dutcheſſe. 8 Cor. All theſe carry no ſuch wonder 55 If I have underſtanding. Piſ. No, no, you Are all the wonder Madam that with theſe Advantages a your fide to draw up mens Affections, yet as you deſpaire to have A Hu to the diſcredit of your ſex, Who article at twelve to be difſemblers; You are in love, Cor. In love, is that a inne? Piſ. Nay, nay, you court a Gentleman with eyes t are not lawfull. Cr. How Sir, be not rude.
Piſ. I can ſay more,
Cor. Is it your mirth or wadnefle, |
Piſ. No, no, you are mad, worſe, Ile prove it, You dote upon your brother, come tis Sn P urge,purge betime, your blood is foule — There's ſome ont in your facenow that would Iſeet h your hearts, a little more Had ſpoild him quite, he had forgot all lawes Of nature and 3 beene ſond To both your ſhamesa brother, and a fiſter Tempt one another, good heaven where is conſcience And modeftie become? preſerve your ſelſe You have yet a good name, keepe it and drinke Julips, Yow!l finde the benefit in your veines.
Cor, You have Beene very bould upon my conſtitution.
Piſ. Tknow it better then your Doctor, Come Doe not deny it, I make no proclamation, What it to me more then my Chriſtian care You ſhould not hurt your ſoules, he is my friend Betray him not, tis no good ſiſters part I can aſſure you, if you be not dull Or blinde with giddy n may ſee
i
„
. e .
The Opportumuiti % Another ſtarte ſhoot influence on him; Be wiſe and envie not the Dutcheſſe favours, Your veſſell may berigg'd,and trim d, and laneh d Into a calmer Sea, and returne fraught, 1 1175 With lawfull priſe hereafter, I ha ſtirrd her, But muſt not be too haſty. Cor. I ſhall ne- My ſelfe too full of guilt. Piſ. You are trouble at it, A figne of grace;how ere you thinke of me Now in the heate of Counſell I me your friend. vou l finde it ſo, kifſe your L.. ak Dee heare? buttwo words more, if you doe finde As being acquainted beſt with your owne body, Nodiſpoficiort to hold out longer, Iha' that will cure you, and Ile juſtify'r Before the colledge . Take me, De'e marke, that does it, I kiſſe your hand, Agen farewell, and have a conſcience, Ile tell you more next time, this way may worke. Exit. Cor. ThisGentlemans diſcourſe though ſomewhat wild And without method ſhakes me, am loſt If Iobey, l know not what within me Too Prompts me to a love ſo irreligious; He is my brother, holy thoughts poticfle me, And when a furious paſſion feekes to invade My will, deſtroy it heaven hee 's here I dare 1% Enter Puta ſſe and Borgia. Not ſtay to tempt my frailtie, let them move Wixh joy, I am not in my ſpheare of love. | Exit. Du. But tell me ſigaior, nay we are pleas d You ſhould be free, upon what confidence Knowing your guilt, and danger to reward it you returne to Vrbin. Jo. I was more fortunate Then I have reaſon for, ndyet my country And friends were pretious madam, nor could life In ſuch a wilderneſſe abroad, where none
— — —
| Th e Opportunatte. D urſt owne me: be a benifiez there was A beſſing in my fate tomsene FOUr mer That gave me boldneſſe.
Dat. Cunningly difſembled, You met no Lady then in all yourtravell,
I meane none whom you ca miftreſſe, with Her loving magicke to lay charmes upon you And forc'd your ſtay,
Bo, None Madam, I was not hes any Ladies chought,none were ſo loft To their one Indgements to imagine me More then a walking ſhaddow, or if amy = r- d _ though tof e - 5
ey quickly found, t not plac' dit rĩ On — — 2 which left rheir — 52 To pay it ſelfe. Das. You doe not promiſe ſnch -- A hard and horridc fition, | But love may finde a oo enter more
Then skinne deepe in your boſome, bat perhaps You left your beds at home, and could not hes:
Diſpence wichnew! In, ; or her ſake you ingly orgot Your danger to not troubled, Confeſſion will not injure you, I like You ſhould preferre the —— of your .
Bo, It Cannot be thought flattery, f I Acknowledge with the narroweſt obſervation
My eyes could take, no place hath beene more fruitſall In beautie then your one, and it doch hold | der progeny with your excellenee, all ſhould _
Be faire and imitate your firſt example. Dut, I ſee you can be when youlift a Courtier, But this confirmes your loveis planted here; And fince we are falne by accident upon This ſulye&,wee'l purſui't a little further; Come I muſt know your Miſtris,doe not doubt
I ſhall diſturbe the _ ſſe of your loves. Bor, What anſwer - I . WH are not e
22.
rr
The Oppertenitie, Yet for diſcovery,ſo pleaſe your highneffe VR IG You would be modeſt,andexcaſe,be wiſer 8
And apprehend my meaning to advance
Your Wilbes tis within my power to eſſett
As much as your ambition can ayme at:
Who is it if her heart be ſtubborne, we
Can make it ſoft; if great above your fortune,
We can raiſe you to her equality, ü
Or bring her downe to your levell, ſince we ha promiſt
In hope not to repent: either declare
The miſtreſſe of your thoughts, and ſinde them proſper,
We are not us d to expreſſe ſuch bounteous language,
But be ſhe proudeſt, greateſt in our Durchy,
Without all limitation, ſhe ſhall carry
No birth or ſtate here, to deſpiſe the ſervice
You fairely meane her: if we faile in this,
We will not thinke our ſtrength wortk the preſerving Be. If I have any wit. Enter Cornelis. Cor. Madam the Duke. |
Dat. What Duke? | Cor. The Duke of Ferrars with a glorious traine Is come to Court, and as the loud voyce is Given out by himſelſe, to claime you ſor his wife,
For which he has your promiſe.
Dut. How our promiſe? Can Princes be fo infolent,befhrew . His haſte,but we ſhall loſe much of our honour To give ne ceremony to his perſon? | How e're our thoughts point,we will entertaĩne him
And dreſſe our face in ſmiles.
Cor, His lookesrenew | My ſufferings, I have not power to manage My wilde affection, my heart will not Be denied but by a ſecret deſtinie.
Runes to imbrace him B rather.
D«t. Ha, Cornelia | I hope you are not courting Borgia,
He is your brother, know your place within
be —- — 2 rr — 4 - | ts —— — — — — — — —
be Opportunitie. Our traine.
Bo, Shee's jealous, jealous, ſtarres Ithanke you,
Tis cleare as light ſhee does affect me now:
Did ſhe not put me too't, to name my miſtris,
Vet in a ſnaddow pointed at her ſelfe ?
Be the the proudeſt, grrateſt in our Dutchy Without all limitation, I mark'd that
And had my ſenſe if great above your fortune We ean raiſe you to her equalitie:
Fine moralls, poore Cornelia loves me too, But I muſt give her no encouragement:
Her grace is much the better woman ha. Loud Mu ſic le.
Apaſſage over the Stage, Duke, Dutcheſſe, Vrſini,
Inlio, Lucio, Pietro, Ladies, She rd diſcontent when firſt Cornelia Brought her the newes,yet they march lovingly
Together, but that ceremony muſt _ Be allow d at Cours, where ſhiſt of face and tongue Are wiſely to be practiz d- my good Lord. Enter x ſini and Pietro.
Urſ. Your ſervant Borgja. Tis her graces pleaſure every gentleman That has relation to the caſte all The bounties of her Court;
Bo, How's this? Urſ. None dare To affront a Groome on forfeit of his place, Let all the offices of entertainment Be free andopen,
Pie. Iſhall figniſie Theſe her commands.
Vrſ. And they that of her owne Court are ambirious to ex their daties Let it appeare in keeping this day ſolemne To wine and mirth,that every brow may ſpeake A joy and welcome to the Duke,
Pie, Tfhall. | Exit, Vo. Here'slike to be atrĩumph, with your Lordfhips P ardonʒ was that the Duke of Ferrara.
COT
.
And is this morning
* hes 1 — ek Is peng, every proyes And ſent their acclawations to heaven To ſee her highneſſe lovingly falute him. Hees a brave Prince.
Bo, A good round gentleman,
He did nor flie hither ; I heard talke of an Embaſſadour.
Vrſ. A cloud for his owne Till his affaires came to maturitie, He ſtood conceal'd toth Dutcheſſe, but laſt night He gain d her princely word to marry him,
ung bright in his one glories.
ON
Bo. Laſt night. Urſ. Ile build more faith upon his honour Faſt as a contract. | Bo, To what painted Paradiſe Would ſhe ha led me ? wood I had my ſiſter now, Urſ. With this joy I had forgot my owne, Borgia; Brother Let not the ſound be unwelcome, tis the Dutcheſſes
Pleaſure to honour her unworthy creature
©rſini,by appointment of our marriage To Waite on hers.
Bo. What marriage? Tu. With your ſifter,
Ile not ſuſpect your love, fince faire Cornelia
Is not diſpleaſd to be directed bßʒ
Her highneſſe, and be confident my love
Shall make the memory of ic welcome to you;
You will excuſe me if | take my leave,
Theſe houres are full of buſineſſe, and I have
Many commands upon me. Bo. In good time,
Tam in a good ſtate agen, I was anafſe
To thinke the Dutcheſſe meant me any thing
But mockery, ſhe told me ſo before
To make more ſport, I ha loſt my ſiſter too,
Shees for D. ſinis carving, I could curſe
2 —— 4 —— —
Exit,
The Om. My ſelfe to Aae ge e, „H o»% [ may rive Cornelis, by giant! 3k" "oa 0171 Atimely farisfaBtion, Inn 5a ry Her brother Borgia:
Ther's all the hope is left, l fall be leech To hunt two  hares,and a aſter loi them beck.
211304) „ 3 | Euter re e : Mer. pet, E., Vour pleaſure gr. SN Mer. e, am almoff hoarſs ith g uiring for you,
let meexamine your ale your 6 Your: Sr? Aer. Thave no . Dee know me ? * Bo, Jam not diſcover d ſure, What crotcher's this ? + Mer. Hee's 'Tis ſo,hee's]
8 I know not how to ec Let IWo me It was the ee ee Mirth from this harren 1255 erte Favors to try my e ou * Wich others to enlarge ee not So tame of ſoule,bur I have ſenſt of al 8 N er. Their 7 whom doe you t Bo. f eres. Bail * Obey to her perſc hr
! " =
perſon, yet ſhe mig
742 d 2 — ſomewhere elſe L Calls expeRarion, .
| {was nor made or the | Mer. Doe not you then 5 | reer Duke.
9 8 y — mb | 1 :
The Opportus tte, 8
Bo, Should any but Dr 1 14 wt Name ſuch a — to . n er! His queſtion with afrowne, ſomerhingelſe_ 5: 2 To waiteupon't,tho lengag d my life = N "TT To afreſh danger, but i am inflib&ed. : _! - | 711 1 ———— ——— Ut ba 70n _ l At What yon ſay. Mer. On this condition
— 9 —
None but my ſi — — 7 f/ Fo, I cannot raile pon the e N. EN.
A wife, my mother's dead. hh 46 gs Mer. Thoud'itnot have her?. . 5 Jo. Ithinke you wod not have her out tber.
= were aac the w e ſex. FOR | ereina tn ne to w e.cm
de 53 .
50 old ehe! 755 12785 0, What to doe Sir?
''s thine eee ſoujerhiing for. 2 And Iam farisf
How am bound to heave 5 Nor taken in the ſub] Veto
Hee'l never marry, how My eſtate? Doſt heare, a little port! 38
Will pk in h thy E He marry he Wee, Cer. ther bim, we fn all ere The Dutcheſſ 1005 and er ſhe is e A
py The reſt is ours raxeyell v with. 1 x er 8
— - ” *
931
/ *
” i
Her.
11 "= : * 5 — „
Jo. Ile thinke ont.
id Enter as fa 7% 01 * 2105
Ar. Did you not meet my ſonne 1s. Yes ſomewhat melancholy.
©
2. "12 1:3} 2: . %% b. Fam 0 NN AN 0 G e.
of
* L - 4 * 1
ou You — — Me advi 3 y el, Lacy He loves — not mocke him, - no bole | No bladder to be ſwolne wich breath of praſe And Ladies Iigges, he is ſenſible he is, And will not be the hacefull decke paſtime To Groomes and Pages.
Ls. What doe you meanemy Lord Aer. Call him not ebe ve you.
E nt 4
Is, We doe noc. 0 "ACE Mer. Nordotende thinks iepoſſbleirmay bes: - 4 La. Have patience, and we bees 5 7
Our opinions, and are cleare of your ſide now.
Is. As the wheeles move we doe thinke 4e VLour ſonne ſhall not be Mr nas ty Safes mee A * L
WhilR Ferrars lives. I. ob Hi 4 111.9 oe
Mer. He ſhall not. OY 80 Se ee,
; Sl :
—— el 5970 Had beene his friend, he bea Duke? ion; HU
How — —— angg 0 To circumſcribe his fortunt he cun aumnber OMA A 0 024
Deſcents of noble blood ad had his brovlingg” IE 0 ee an par ok 1620 How ere you value ide At randome thus, he fhannot. N ett u
75 — J\
Lu. Heare us Sir. 1 N. 9 40 14 in - el Ad: lh Te
Aer. He hall not bea Due. Aim: Falls, "ot 0 2 Did not I ſa he was mdf a fu 3-41} ; 2 aff; 9 31.35
That was di 15 eld e to ſee carnedib ireame, 0441 And Ferrara onely h wi old, 0 wat © | 4
ar" 4:46, eee e $0007 230] What thing is that⸗ * Vf 107 . 13 Ia be ſo confident ? pit: 24
Fac a Gon ethinke
| | | |
hiwſofely in you N 01 got tt
Ile winde bi up 0 an Ehr. thy ſhape boy ne wonnot loſe the ſport,
And = ily I willacquainttheſe gentlemen.
4% BY 4: Ainet ei te 11
Should be whipt heattih ſor my nonceit. The little high German — take it kindly, Ic may be the court largeſſeʒ hut no matterr. I have ſome gold and dare vencer the lait At any time for coyne ofthis complexion. 1.1 201. * \/ -+ Ls. Are youlneancflc:). I Till beexcetient, - And pleaſt henhigbneſſe, ſhe has commande!“ All rtie of minth ile undertake e h eri To * 311177 F 2% 81 | N 's | Fi Abontit sahen, Ihb,V tr My part i th enterlude, loſe no time boy,,
Thou n is 0
We may Piſ. K
15.1 : 7
Ta " 19 4143
Enter
Ol promi ſes ? thoi Red bnd. No att chat could et wich a din,jöi e Vpon our perſon, yardremuſi n h,ẽf - 5-21
So jeaſted into dieaNrince 520 23114531 ——ũ—4—ͤẽ— + — Imaginary w $0 nh h ee 4 7% Y 4 A EG Gs Lordi: „„ hott And ſhall not in a dreamegive up our ſelfe,:i* +: » 32. ot Were we giſpoſd to marry or catartict <c: :c inet Sr - * Our felfe, the day ſhall witneſſe ĩt wibuut A bluſh, let, guiltie foules call night to cu. Their promiſes, we aro inudceim Per. Good Madam Render me not ſp loſt to wy atone fun 9920 „N L f 2 of a Prince befelyrorcoine!i.);"\ 9, | | age for my purpoſe, though you ma, 2 the ban 1 —— 23.4) 3ff
To
Your judge ment of me, mile me not ſo miſerable 1 & |
FI - =Y ” A ,
The Opp. To let the Court thinkeTinvenced' this - - As deſtitute ofnobler wayes to move you, But I preſume this istotty my patience And make my joyes at laſt more rio By this delay; Iknow you are And cannot ſtaĩne your ſelſe bya denyall Of any ſyllable you ſpeake. b — fhall laugh if you perſiſt chu: Of your grace, 1 3 - 5 — wm 12
Are flatterd in their ſleepe, I fpeake to
Fer. Then Madamleake leave,cocell yourisnor
Done like a P rinceſſe of that character We havereceiv'd,and if I had no witnefſe I ſce what mirth we are Prepar d for. Det. Wieneſſe Tbere is too much at Bake my Londalready, To racke this argument for yourowne fame, Proceeds not o enlarge it we would rather Confei ſume guilt againft our felfe;chen let You honour be ex — For loving us, yet In this we To ned yorn Yourocke our ml tt Fer. Was ever ſuch a mockery, I fee ] muft produce more teftimony,you ſee Can juſtifie if you pleaſe, I have aim d we 7, but truth, 32 — Catch d up the voyce, ſhe ſpake it to you io. Bo, What ay 868 Sends | . Fer, That ſhe reſolvd co marry us. Bo. Yourexcellence -
Muſt pardon we, I heard her highnefie ſpeake
No language to that purpoſe. Du. We honour - +
You Borgis for acquitting us. Cor. Tis truth her highneſſe never ſpake ſo, hin I did
G 3
* c * 1 * 544 9 „ * 0 1 =
' » 26 1%. f
Whom.
— 3 —
The Oppertaniels; *
Whom ſuppoſd che Ducchefſe,and this muſt Sound bel in him to be ſo negative.
Fer. It ſeemes you have ban Madam, 1 Muſt be the generall mirth. 4 Du. — 122
unning in muſt appl y ſome complement ts
For our owne henour — my Lord your privacie.
Bo, How er e her grace be a little impudent I had beene madde tohdftifie the Duke In ſuch a cauſe, ſhe has no minde comarryhim,..
ay vn talk'd co me laſt co try of wit, women are ſubtill creatures, No es. tho Vrſivicourt my ſiſter,
My ambitions faire a tother fide agen. Enter Julio, and Lucio, and mhiſper with hee. 107 Vrſ. Tis ſtrange the Dutcheſſe re lo a = Cor, Vpon * 1190 | My conſcience ſhe heard wk, "OI 3685/1614 $14 —— Yet She denies. :. 1 Car. Li eyẽ her too Vrſ. You ſpeak a riddle dad.. f, Du Willyouy Lord , Admit of ſo much miri t.. Fer. You ſhall command mea Det, Remit em chen, the red lcleat 2 To your ſatis faction. Buten 10% Ni Fimo: Piſ. De 'e heare, hat Privceds F ente > your ſelſe / Pin. Why any Prince in Spain. Fif. No Ile adviſe you You ſhall be an Italian Prince in Spaniſh table, Now I thinke better ont, tis que int, and will 18 itzt Be gratcfull for the witty noveltic: d b Every common Prince goes in his countries faſhion, Such as you are not ordinary, be bold. Bo. Why didſt bring him hicher? k Piſ. Peace I maydoeyou acurtelie,! ,, :- - 3 your owne counſell and be ignorant Ofchis ſtrange Creature, ſiy you are The Duke of thus diſguiſd for reaſons
Coun td your ſelfe.
Pim.
The 254. | Fim, Duke of Ro alone. Pif. Anne ont oft. 7 Pim, Iwonnot; ge |
Is that the ors ? ſonſo. _ 1 you. +1; 2
ou wonngt
A0 eaven knowes m
Remember who you are. Pim. V 9 Sn FEY Aſ. Dutchefle of . was your Court.
As this, the darling Dut. He ſeemes Vrſ. What | wm ha we Af. antooda our lrg bels no bene
But 0 Italian ſpright 1 : |
Famous jn Arts and Armes,as ſhall
If any man dares queſtion him, ſhould y
But fee him at ſome royall exerciſe
& your ſelfe, * 295 00,
1
Barre with any of Guard, Pay PE Ee Wen Ne and North Olympicks,,
e the Arabian B ird, and — 5 The nimble Elephant, ſo rarely okil'd.
Tn muficke,that he has a grea akin.
To go to hell to challeng [aaa |
To with him, on
From A an ntothe inn ary Ina Dit. - Mice!
are the outſide ofhis qualities,
in him, and your grace! (hall finde
Pim. Tel ga Ilove her.
Aſ. With all cheſe vertues and ady
Ocblood and fate he comes to court your highneſſe; Dat. We are infigitely honord, and wud chant ia,
But that we know nor yet this Princes name.
Af. Duke of FerartMadam,js hixtitles . ,
yer ting? 2 tm, 115
5
| q » % * —_ L
You mudthine vey more then moral he fhallpirch» |,
* am.” - _— — 5 1 wer = * 2 * — lb — — * - _
 Thope
* » | i F gp mr mr mmm pm immu O_o. ont Ak.
The 7 | WIE ie. 3
Here ow 85 of F ar- w ? . Ts he loa conterſele
A meere impoſtor = ee
High Get . ries -+ A true Prince needs no g
Sirrah darſt uſurpe 2 Pim. Tis mine 8
yo Wer Nabe l A plot of Borgir to diſhonour yon. an yrotace ic, 4 7
Fer. Ile have s hearr,
As for this wretch.
Pim. Doe, doe, L lo- eee er bene: Fer. Madam yo be be f me well. lay no more, : Zei. Fer. and Urſ. Pim. Wespe Aion, be call tim to account hereafter.
De. 1 Aſpheaßt, by ur wy
Pim, — ts the matter? Is. You muſt be whipe no Pim, Whip a Prince? arr de Ex, You muſt be Duke Pim. Duke of a Fiddle-ſfitke,y Ons an Ague Gentlemen? . Thelaſh when thee come ey will keepe you you 7 one Pimponis, to overtake him preſently, ebe e on und yon cannot give him ſo muc weight, now yott are f 5 4 but * lietle wee l ſend you a whip, Pim. How am transform d, Duke of Ferrara tt I were any ching, know not what Tamas they have handled me. En Dutche ſſe and Pietro, Dus, Is the Duke gone? | Pi. Les Madam. . | Dur,
i
adi Don. weder K
ED * me |
warme, doe TT in caſe
Oppo ili
Dt. le have the foole hang'd then: 1 . .
Pim. That's J. Dat. Alas fellow, ha, ha, ka, what art Db Pim. — I hope (he aa eee, en. Luft
my ſelſe. 57 nn Due. _ cher Sirral. :
Whoſe deviſe was ircobid yu lap you were: Duke of Ferrara ? Pim, Alas not I Madam, he is gone.
Dat, Whois gone? 1 4 * Pim. The in o t| © made a fools
Das. e r w
or gre adbe whip A Pim, oben
enen Dat. Where be your cloa 1. e Pim, — 9 . Dr. He has puniſhment enough, 5 1
Pim. To obey Dat, Why & you
11
ſweat
mn Pie. — * ir Bac ee Fer. How magerer hat are ou? * Pim. A Tumbler, doe you know me?
Joer. I know thee? ?- 3 Pim. leah aun r= nat iter Pura. Pie. „ 45 1 A
Bo, Iacrend. |
Pim. How 1 7 ia? . mth, ce bas Staying here to fin Je my fel ſome friends of Tie d e rather venture a the then ſtay fort, I muſt be F + — —
kickes they ne, I wonnot temꝑt miſd to hang me, nd I can doe that for 2
a minde toot. Ener Tulie,and Excio. Ju. Kicke that ak out of che Court.
Pim. Tou are Sir ahe ans ſome body c have | Es.
beene ki Enter Dutche 77 and Borgis, Bo, Madam en,
*
Dug
of 17 * 4 i — TT
nee
Du. Let it reward your palnes. CTR Iu. Obſerv'd you that. ** Du. Convey tl to MHerentio it creates TY Contraiilerofour houſhold, this I hope Will merit more of his ecquiinance with” Our Court. 1
Bo. You — 8 |
14 . #43 4
Dut. Leave us, Px: | You may ſtay Sir, what eee that you named 55
2. Suite Madam? r Did noi bud Iſuite to u ws, 4 4 Ty l reach yori Deg? os |
Ihopeyour modeſtie wi To lim it your requeſt;that it mi be
Such as may both —— 2 e and your” Acceptance,ſpedke@'y 4 « Bi eee e 2 Bobo ſuice Madam? oi weiß sas ret u 461 M= anthe confderice 67 your Uiſererion
Name and enjoy what ycu deſire.
Zo. 1 4 as abicion, | UL
ic Beyond all my 1 Dat. Well Sir to'th' urpole, 1 would have pa now. 3 1 55
To purpo & ond Idurft,
8 0s To Thinekcvedbal the reſt
I be mad And loſe this op 11 5
n
OO * —  — — — a nie. > 7. 5 2
To. — -- Er ˙ Ou re nn 34 OS oe RE, 2 .
4%
ee be 2 1 to
Digs and "FONG, .. We hub andkoga on R ir rc
Dut. A ſmile nd an ziel ſervice,ls this all? You wonnot purchaſe much by being a Courtier.
g your ee
Ws. e
25.
Tie Opporttnitie, ... Bo. The gene by fargur Lhe of,
Ano porcunicie. 175 Da Lane NY 3 e
Bo, She Askes agen, now He We are private, I any" —— Dat. A courtier Zo. Of love. Dat. A prettie winter e weatiog,and herpes well. In faſhion. 15 Bo, May I preſume to as aske your grape : Dt. A queſtion ? yes dit. Bo, Doe you love me Madam? Dut. How Sir? Bo, Does your grace loveme ? | e dares &y ein So great ani treaſon to us. n Are all onrfayours r N Conſider d in the crowd of other wo N Fit for your mixture o be nd wich e Wot
: "Tv 4
And deſperate proffers of your wanton 3 N
Have we na ninre And titles Or de e hope we are Of Had tune ſuch poſſeſſion of our brow, . Thou — expect no killing frowne for this?
Was our eye growne ſo tame nothing cquld quicken ie © Into a flame,intoaconſuming lightning, 1
When ſuck an object durſt appeare to vexit? | * — we could ſpurne thy ſawcy head off but Tn
rdon it, de e heare? we XA parent it, | Tot ew mercy.is above all fault, And that we are at home Queene of our x paſſions, Nor ſhall you ſuffer under the remembrance, Tis now as it had never vo you keepe | The firſt place in our thoughts.
Bo, Ha'?
Dat. Wiſely preſerve'em And ee you timerous mls
diftinQion in our birth 17 lifa 'd | 6 i y
ebnete wy
to puniſh ſuch an infolence > © ben
2
The Opportuni tie. Then thinke us angry! 20
Bo. Did ever Sunn a | From ſychablacke aid ebe den doul. I wouldhs kid ody for a beane ſtalke Within two minute, ſh as an excellent wit And cunningly ſhe reines it, whats your pleaſure I ſhall write Madam? Dut. A letter, a love letter, are you ready, Write as I bid upon your life, — love 70. Zo. I am perpar d. Dut. Write I love you Sir, de e not under and me? Zo. Shee'l make me mad, ha done, Ilove you. Dil. flo sir? Be. There wanted Sir f love you'Sr, Dat. And if yon Abe nter of apprebhenfion. Ja. And if, Nc. Dat. Tou 1wi ilely entertainer,
Fo, You'l wiſely,$c. Dut, All — forgot,meere methis evening
Bo. All errori r.
Dut. T'th privie Gatdemand receive more tefimouy.
Bo, Þch privie garden, &c. (marry you. Du. Meane time heere is my hand, that in the morning Ile
Bo. Meane ti — a divell - ede
Fha' done;it 92 5 onfirmution—-ſo. To who rl 5 E oil
Du. You will be mp 3 dangeret 44.
Jo. To whom?
Det. To him chat yes webe, 5 Nuit.
Deceive me not farc ä Bo, I love you Sir, "” toe letter and I wrote it, To whom, to him that "loves her beſt, if none love her better,
Tis to my ſelfe? Why am I fo ſerupulous 7 She has made me Chancellor in the cauſe, There's noe particular nam d, yet (he was augry, Yer the was pleaſd a n,and had my crime. Beene * * t it chien Sek 1 eee t- B33 0g as ſare-
The Opportunitie. As I haveany ſenſe,ſhe'does affect me, And tries _ at the laſt weaponof wit How Ile behave my ſelſe, are you there Dutcheſſe; She is my owne,andthis invites me to The cloſe of all my ha Forfeit this opportuni & Tranſplant his goodly eares to this dull head; And ler all women at me, my ſtarres I bow to you, and kiſſe your influence, Iam exalted t o your fj already, Where, with the Dutcheſſe I will fic and fhine A conftellation. - Tuer Ferrara. Fer. V'are well met Sir, =o BorgiaI take it. Bor. Y ou may change that name Andcall me — 9 Fer. You Ve Butcarry treaſon 33 heart, you n me? Jo. Duke of Ferrara, Fer. So, was t your plot to bring That puppet toaffront me ſore the Dutcheſſe: Was there noe other name to be uſurp d,
Diſhonor d, and prophan d by hounds and monkies-
But mine? Bo, Innderfiand you not Is not directed right my Guiltie in thought;
Fer. Your feares ſhall not excuſe.
„For anger Iamnot
Bo. Vou are abus d. Fer. Imow Iam Lir, and.
Will print revenge The character ofa
Bo, ] muſt tell you Duke. Fer. What Sir 7.
Bo. Were you maſter ofthe world, Could you ſtioot death beyond a Baſiliske, Or had you miſchiefe in your breath above The Lernean vapours, or the killing ſteame
Of che hot lake that poyſons innocent Birds. But daringto flie over, I wonld 11 3
1 ,((hallcarry |
The Opportunitie. Wich as much confidence to ſcome this calummie As I would quench my thirſt, or chide my Groome
The drudges for me, Duke I am no villaine,
And tho my blood runnes not ſodet pe a purple - There's no corruption in the chapeſt veine My Liver feeds, tis cleare and honeſt ſir, _ _ 2 Ile meet and tell thee ſo
auger thy guards, and gawdy Butter- flies,
1 — 7 3 — 1 Fer. You thinke The place protects you now. I 2407
Bo, Were it in a Church 9 9 f e No drop of mine could ſtaine it, Duke I cannot Feare and be maſter ofa ſword, that needs No valour in a cauſe ſo juſt as mine To ſtirre thepoiar,by all my hopes.
Fer, Thy hopes, k Of what reverſion? _ 3 ce is vacant ?
Bo. Come tis not done becommingl To inſult becauſe you have a — Of Duke above yon, I am here a ſervant To a moſt gracious PrinceſſG
Fer, At that name I dre * New flame, and ſhould I credit thy foule free From this diſhonour, thou haſt ſinne enough Ta thy ambĩtion to pull ruine on thee,
Are we too fit to be in competition'Sir?  '. 0.dà Haſtthou a thought ſo proud, ſo daring in thee To be my rivall ? Have I courted her
To herowne height, a Prince? and (hall her vaſſall Looke on her with an eye, leſſe then ſerves The Altar with, becauſe ſhe is pleaſd ſome time To laugh, and ſeeme indulgent to your ſervices For her owne ſake, can you have braine to thinke Such treaſon to her jud that ſhe loves you?
Or can ſhe be ſo loſt to truth and honour Not to make good her promiſes to me Religious as a contract, has ſhe not Declard me worthy of her, and my love
The -Opporianitte. .
The beft of all the world. Bo. How was that Sir? * Fer. The beſt of all che world, tis not that! 1
Can be ſo poore in my eſteeme ofher
Whoſe mention is ſacred, or my ſelſe 5
That I have any jealouſie thou caiſt
Inherit 5 the hundredth pare 76
Ofany thought that points apon affeftion :
Haſt thou no ſoule to apprehend thy ſcorne?
Nay did ſhe . thou might it grow inſolent t
Vpon her favours late declare It was not love but mirth and wantonnefſe
Ofrevelling nights,commanding on thy life Thou feede no ambicion dang
To her, beyond what waited upon dutie
You,may * Bo. Tis cleare, this none Could tell him but her ſelſe, I inde too plaine SE Who is the may-game of the Court, this laſt Convinces me,your pardon mightie vir
Youlove the Datehefſe,
Fer, Beſt ſhe will acknowledge. Of = mankind. on,
I have aletter to 1 vill not doubt my when you reade it, (rain'd +
Tis to you Siriftherecanbeea joy beyond whar' - there ce con Fer. Ha? Iam bleſt,
-rgialer meimbrace thee my beſt friend: fe INN
Dwell in my heart, di vide with me Ferrara |
Oc UVrbin,any thing but the Durcheſſe, ſay
Ile meet her in the Garden were ie w
Wich flaming Dragene I have not a ſoule Spacious enough to entertaine this happineſſe
* above my life deare Borgia. Exit. Lependbrbe it ſeemes i joy was not
Expetted 2 and I had no commiſſion
To give it him, after all this if ſhee-
Meant it not this way, I ha made fine worke,
She might ha namd him, wud I had the paper
agen, now doe! propheclic eI have.
OE
Vadone
To a warme p
The Opportunitie, Was Vadone wy ſelſe and onely her grace meant That I ſhould 3 my eaſineſſe ; I haveloſt an opportunitie,no fate Flatterd a mortall with the like, dull braines,
There s yet prevention, genius I thanke thee, - A
Tis poſſible I may ſecure the Garden boldly meet her ſirſt, ifany deſtinie Owe me this bleſfing wich this art I may Redeeme my ſolly, never man hut I Wud loſe ſo rich an oppoxtunitie. Eon. Efliu Qui s. Enter Dutcheſſe, Mercutio, Ladies. 8505 AdamT know not what to ſay,my heart
Is full of heartie zeale to obey you, but the place You have conſer d upon my yeares, is much Above my ſtrength to ſatisfie, yet I thanke you. Dat. Yeu have deſerv'd we ſhould encqurage you For what is paſt, your ſonne is full of hoze
And may grow upa ſtaceſman. Aer. He owes all Toyour infinice favors Madam, a young man, And would be active upon your commands. Dut. Leave us, ſtay my Lord we muſt employ you. Her. J have not life enough to ſerve you Madam, My age is now a burthen, that I could 5 701 Shake off a ſcore of winters. Det. There's no ſuch Neceſſitie of youth to execute ; The fervice you e, you love your. ſonne. Aer. Above my owne health Madam, and let me Be bold to tell your grace, I love him better For your ſake. Dat, For our ſake. Mer. That he can car Himſelſe ſo hanſomely to deſerve your good Opinion; every Courtier that s advane d does not behave bimſelte Alwayes to purpoſe,
The —
= To lac Prpoſe Signior | DD er. To Wadde a Tam Ir * n Confefſe 1 of his expectations, [2021
It makes my blood dance Madam. |
Dat, Youare HI 13 en
ebe dach s 0
Da. Well Sir, while we „ b Ati ee ebe be your cu
We be not incerruj To none but Boy: — privacies Onely concerne in knowledge; ' BI
Aer. My ſonne Jogis. Dat. Your ſonne, if Fondoe call him Boris Aer. Shall Utgoeforkim? |
| — Shee's gone into the Garden, and commands | - ive acceſſe to none but Borgia; 1 dre u f has gre bee, o keepe t a I will do t now in pighrob my owns humour, Habo A ee ee nne e Ire Enter Ferrara. Fer. The
waſtes 2 pace, lcarnorbe Too ſoone at my.
nen,
Mer. Hee re 7 IH: ο % oat] £: * # * 9 *
0 © 4 | ; * A * * 18 A 1 : 0 Already Borgis. * 0 1 * bs.» © *1 710 % * TY a5 15 4 : D 4 0 — 4 { 42 N . * L . * k = ' 0 F ” 9 1 =
Fer, ebd. Is that the word ? who names bete Aer. This vening we apo eu Aer, T arent oe: a Sy ich Prove my bo . ©: So, ſo, if it — — 5
With Er
< » 4 * vt a 7 *
S893 261 2175 N 20
Nr ————. = _
IS.
The Opportunitie. Gonvenient cozining Arbors, coſt e Qn pretty mazesglabyrintbs of love: vou might be there ſecure, and entertain Sweet time, moſt tall and faſhionable hedges In whoſe inclofures, Ladies that are willing May loſe themſelves, and the ext walke no wider; Now I thinke ont, this Cloyſter with the —_ Of ſach an evening mightbedarke enough For ſuch a turne; many a gentle woman Has beene content ta embmee upon worſe termes Oh che Court lobbies,but I tell no tales, O
Enter B
Another moving this OATS ke |
The Gardens taken up, mas,
To ſay I am the Duke, that if — fallow: E
He may prevent his dee. 908027225 Mer. Vp, umph
Bor. That name will —_ the gates fy open to me
And J paſſe undiſcoverd. Mer. What are you?
Bo, Here doe ole
Aer. The Duke Vour grace muſt pardon: me, Jam commnded_
To admit none, her highnefſe will w__
ED in - w $ $& *
ar
ee.
an
The garden ivatly. d inunog Ids + Lia 03 ©:
Bo. Lord CMercntio, L Ina ＋ py
Aer. Your 3 my nlemuſt.” Ayme at anothers pleaſure, if yube The Duke I cannot helpe it, I am but Greene in ee eee Iwould not forfeit * em
With my owne headto boot H eee "7
Bo, Then Ile diſcover] am Botgra 16511 Your ſonne, your * you |
Toi Pacha
dyes I . ebene band
Shee'l
| The Opporinniie: Wl On Shee'l make me Dukeold lad. AV Die tam in hes Aer. Be not tranſported EG For if you be my ſonne doe you obſerue © You Dee e Gen e en Old Aferewioand old lad. o Hes 227 v. jag
Bo, Your pardon Sir, 8 1 1 Fan we joy of ſuch a blifle allowes e LAS! way are you flow to make you ſqune the 8
mankinde, the evenings b glory The windsdoe whiſper genely v np G 58 The birds with Muſicke waite to ente me... £3 Into Loves Bower, the Trees bow to my enttancs, | 11 05 And hethacirehe Mifteſſ of ll theſe | „ Aer. 1 1 BR |
Bor. There's death in. | Or dare you not beleey ; 1 8 3 the Dusche 5 | Ki | lee 2 171. n th 91 en, Oe | ET What you have ſaid; her grace 72 appoigtme To waite here,and commanded I ſhould give Acceſſe to none bur Borgia, de e marke?
Fhe was pleaſd to tell me ſhe had huſineſſe one
Concern d your knowledge,] diſpute not Mat. But r NN W | _— 56h She was ſo merry about es wh: And praifd you to my face. ay aaa
Bo. If this have faith w'ee Why am not I admitted
Mer. Alli In good time.
Bo, The gates ſhould ſpread themſelves. Aer. They (hall not — teach them withleſls trouble; But frſt I — a ſuite to you.
Zo. Tomo,
Speake and command it.
Mer. Tis within mans remembrance That you did want a pardon, * begge mine,
4 2 - — 2
ed 3
The Opporraniive. : : And make what other conditions wich the Dacchetfe | You pleaſe. ' Be. Your ow: 3 Mer. Les I am parcell Traytor Againſt 3 NG too much care aboue - My office made me abuſe it I admitted Wa
Sound I difch Had dureths wro ay And let him i "% ns Bo. Inzwhether?
a ag a rhe Lato the Putcheſſe,
— "ola 1 ain blaſted; It was the Duke upo
Mer. The — an — — 8 alchc twere duskiſi Me thought he ae ore com ee But why Thould he take your! name?” Bo. Loſt fort her. Ar. Tou found badnot Loſe no more time; your pou May ſet all ſtrei gh, and purchaſę me Be. Be rache { fav amn ing 75 Thou haſt depri d me of the w That ever Sunne- beames ſhin d on. Aer, Does he thou me? | How would he domineere and he were Duke ? Bo. My fortune bleeds to death, tis how too late
That ah eee all my hape, and were ould ſcorne my want of confidence
-to kis, bower ever
Fed ber recs | on.
8 Maine laugh me 6a 0 och world.
Her. Hee 8 very paſſionite.
Bo, But there's no dwelling in this Wüderweſke, Things paſt are paſt ſorrow, there is yet A way to binde my wound! up and ſecune My heakb,chough notalife with ſo much ftare
- The ONT,
Three lover me il
As was e Cornelia, I
At work a little paſſion 1 on ara clearing Jam another ec.
es her my owne, and me from the Paſc ons Age pry clus ql He _ 23 tet cok e Na Exis.
and] am like to ſuffer fort, weile favour Iwill waite no longer t wen your grace is weary, You ſhall not neede to ſtrike me at the doore; Tis open and Ivanifhia the darke; Stay and Ile ſend ſome others to attend you, you, You will want light, ſonne ſhall be no Duke I perceive now, nor will Ibea Courtier; | Pur me to keepe the duet I Enter Cornelia, Laura, and Melinda. Cor, Did the dĩſiniſſe you then? Lax. 'T was not her pleaſure We ſhould attend. Mal. We left my Lord Mercutio Vour father with her. Cor, Went ſhe towards the Garden 7 Las. Yes,where's your brother Borgia # Cor. Iknow not. Alilel. He is infinitely beholding to her grace, She never mentions him without a Hourll: Iknow not, but if I have any skill In lookes or language, there is ſomething more Then common in her highneſſe breaſt meant toward bim Lax. Shee may be in love. Cor. In love with whom? Laus Your brother. Cor. I bluſh to heare your weakeneſſe, I hope he  Hath more wit then to build vaine hopes ont hat; ſtoope not to flies. | Mel. But the Wren Couch d underneath the aſpiring Eagles wings.
13 Quickly
— oo tc Moo act S . Ay @
The Opportunitie: MEL
Quickly advance it ſelfe when, to· chert mounted And glories in her hight, tis but a |
And the ſmall thing is King of birds, the ſable Has pret Te in t.
Gor. ot ſure # A rebell i in my nature to his fortune, But dare not pawne my owne diſeretion To take up your opinions. Enter Pietro: Pie, Signior Piſauro your brothers friend deſſres To ſpeake with you. © | y Lau. Wee l leave you Madamby, this time her grace May want our duties. Ener Plſauro. Piſ. Did I fright you Ladies looks better on me. Lau. We have ſeene you round Sit. Piſ. But doe not know what*s'in e. f Adel. We deſire To die in that pretious ignorancde. Exit, Piſ. This Lady I hope's not of f your minde, Cor. Your pleaſure My ſervant ſaies you would ſpeake with me? Piſ. It you 3 Lady I was bold to urge Alittle counſell on e it faſtens I come to underſtan 33 Cor. What counſell Sir. Piſ. About your brother Signior Borgia. Cor. Pleaſe you aſſiſt my memory. Piſ. Why it was But this, I had a kinde of ſeare you lovd This brother Madam. Cor, Would you have me be So impious not to affect my brother. Piſ. But you lov'd him the wrong way, de e heare luſtily You underſtand, with the deſire of coupling: There lies no diſpenſation for that loc _ Tis impious — ou had better h ſtate you are inkeepe a Penſioner To give you heats; a fellow that will venture
The Opportunute. His body at all houres, then to offend once + With ſo mach finne to nature. | Cor. Doe you thinke | Iama Monſter Signior? Piſ. Better An honeſt man one a great deale: Your husband may be exeuſdi th progreſſe Lady, Beſides he may have faults a negligence In's viſits, or miſtaking of his times, When you are invited ed another Lord Toa banquet,or take or the aire Appointed by your Doctor, there are reaſons To excuſe an active Lady that is married But to affect your — ſo, inexpiable. Cr You have invention enough to furniſh The Court with vice, how ere you ſeeme to have Care of my ſoule, pray give me — 3 Doe you ever meane to marry? Piſ. Marry? oh yes. Cor. Not a Court Lady ſure: Piſ. One of that tribe — Cor. Without the feare Of being ſuch a monſter made by her Whoſe wantonneſſe you wittily have charactred. Piſ. I ha red ee. ſhall marry W ill be very hone chaſt as I Shall be to her, did — tell you what Whirligigs are i' th — — that twere better And ſafer for your conſcience to be one Of Venus order, and keepe tame a Groome- A ſtallian Dormant then embrace a brother. Cor. What ſhould incl ine you To imagine me ſo loſt to modeſtie? | What have you read in me to make you thinks I love my brother ſo? Piſ. My charitie.
' Cor, There's little charitie in thoſe ſuſpitionz,.
Hav
6
The Oppertunitie.
Haveyou no other
Piſ. Yourbrother Told me himſelfe you lov'd him ſtrangely.
Cor. So, ſo.
Piſ. Naym 7 he was i' th ſame Jpg
Cor, Hetol You that himſelfe too. |
Piſ. Les, yes, till I tamper'd wich him And Arif d his fleſh wich ghoſtly counſell, Read Law and Lectures, I will tell you Madam He was once fo overgrowne with love, he had Reſolv'd to tell you he was not your brother, And rather then be fruſtrace of his hopes Vow'd to forſweare ir,and ſubborne He was no kin to you, borne I know not where, And never ſaw the tone afore, whoſepeople Had all this while cozend themſelves, with an Opinion he was Borgia;here's a youth now, Did he ne re deale with you to ſuch a purpoſe.
Cor. Never, he wud not be ſo wicked ſure.
Piſ. Did you ever heare the like? youknow it now, Thanke heaven and a good friend that cold pawn this; A friend that wud not ſee this pretty veſſell Loſt i th quĩcł- ſands, when both goods and ic.
May be his owne another day: * 5 And none ſhall doe you
Cor. I ſhould be ingratefull Not to acknowledge Sir this nobleoffc Meant to preſerve me.
Piſ. That was my | ml You may requite ic 1 fyou pleaſe.” (1:2
Cor, With love,
Piſ. Tis the reward my ambition firſt aymes at
Cor. I love my brother now in his owne place, And . —— friend I will not „ ut to enlarge my knowledge of your worth And take me netrer 6930: or his ed
And
The oe. And free conſent, 5 | Piſe 2 now you blefle we Lady, | If his thrĩve in the Dutcheſſe as doubr not Iam le ſeeke him out, l wiſh no better Teſtimomy, he ſhall not gi t you under band. Cor. —5 , hafte, g Pip. nowes me to at ought;r Run He ſhall dooꝰt prefencly,if I can light on bim. Cor. Tomorrow Signior, I ſuſpect it not. Piſ. It does concerne wy honour, tis done infancy,
_—_— —— eee = 1 e has an —z way of — fur my brother,
vuleſſe — A. e this wildneſſe on iſe, will be ſparing to contract too faſt, he ercanh outſide, . — ou tho — cnnmner And 1 u gere 2 Enter Orſon,
— ere
a n 4 nan ae me.
Cor. v. Ay Lord, x That youhavelor'datleaſt profeſſ'd d fomach, N b
Ca wes - <
The Opportanitie. Beſeech you Sir, did the firſt H Motion that wroug einde dune =; Me 1 of your — n ga e ie, 3 x Urſ. No Madam, | | long cheriſh'd the ſoft ire. 1 211,216! Thar tryed the pureneſſe of it, 4 ho objeft. | 3 That ſhot ſo bright a flame imo my boſome, And had n it ſtili, dut chat your vertue Grew up too powerfull againſt it, ten I rooke lcaveits expretis how re To be your votar . i L205 Cor. Gite me equall licence”: . © > My Lord in che fame cauſe:ro try my elle | I — 9 coo would be 1 of fomeching In you to be examin d. 1 UVrſ. I ſubmit, 15 500 And ſhall Se enen ſeed * FER. Hange on your Sppe, Fcome to be determin d Your ſervant or your ſacrifice, for to ga Ar diſtance thns. | Cor. Then you expect an Fe Ol 0 Preſently, I kh feare my Lord Huan In that particular, ſacisfie yourLordſhip, 1 | :<. Urfſ. You want nokaowledgrofme, neren perlt * In my paſt ſate but m Im *£172 5189251 My nature needi na bod Söfun! 1:
Cleare to your view, m
ſon not much witherd; If theſe together want cl Ican 1 Deſerve you may Id, ſor — E ee
The extent of my
Ofa noble ſervant to perſus his miftrlwitul> 02299402 2:13 if
By unruly wayes,and interpoſe commands EE] { 4
And power of great omen enforce the heart no; Ofany Lady: chaugh I muſt confefle ' '' / + 18
The OH
Her grace may challenge my obedience , To her law rp ,ichas And love and religion cannot —
Urſ. You I conclude me, MH —
A favour from the Dutcheſſe to propound My wiſhes, and plead for me, I — well
— e not 1 her power | 7
w your me, and that — boaſt my 1 of beautions — Without your — n Accept then ſhe to force, and anſierſur A crime more facall then the raviſhers. Enter Pietro.
Pie. Your brother Madam. Fn 3 014 1
Cr. If I have any power My Lord you mut not leave m
Entreate your ſmall retreate For aſew minuts.
Urſ Your commaiid's4 Eavour.,,.
8 Bo. Oh Cornelia. ,: NJ d nie Bo, Are ygu euch. I: Cor. Tou . Ry 0 110 5 ut Cor, Love D. bare. r
Done to beget your doubb. Arete nn hogs
Boy. But doe you love me | = More then afiſfer?.if1 | —_
Which is not love, but fond of nature In us, © in us, Could you affect me then, then if l anfwerd
This —. with a true and noble V pon ſuch brave condition | Couldour hearts meere and marry } | Cor. This were ſtrange, | But not ſo ſtrange that we hk love:
N 111.7 pd
—
nee um tin.
0 SHUI Mt; OY" Denn ebe e e
e an br Thee proofe. MMO OV 0 ted $3 001% e Cor. "Tis comeaboul”" em e *
Ems Pics,
Bo, Piſauro welddme' © 0
The man ofall mankintmaſ-oifh or milobmer Madam this gentleman cafiWitnelſe Tam ot 02 of n None of your — we wete bred together,
Both borne in Millan, and my name is Aurelio Andros zi ſonne to P Pm Andro xi major do 4 * 11. My friend too of a niol
bi. 44.
Bo. Weary We both — our ſelves to ont forrune: Abroad, and for the warres had Our ſelves,we rooke but Urbin in the Way, i 0
1 * A
Where ſome good ſtarres deriMid ity | E e STIOIS u
Car Ha, ha, ha. „Ns _ 3 I e FE et) Bo, Dee laughat me, G iſaur ay hee' incredalous) 0 e
Speakeandconvince her u | P Piſ. J have told enough
Bo. She wants faith.
Doe you not | Piſ. Fam lorry Bo. Cornelia,
Piſauo Why art ho Pry
Pic Itel . = ine: 21 155 N . bine
Gor, Tis time I then d Piſ. Now my happine go. My Lordi pray come forth. -
-
*
-— n
me Opp ee | Emter Orſon, Vou Gentlemen by your owne confeſſions. Are ſtrangers to me, and altho I doe not Diſtruſt heavens providence, I ſkall not inne To give my freedome up where Iam I My Lord ener eber 122 Shee s thus your mne. Urſ. Wich greater joy
Then I would take an Ereplre,this dropy peace Vpon my brothers aſhes,and unĩtes For ever our two familie.
Piſ. — s the Dutcheſſe?
Bo. I prithee dos not vexe me. _ Piſc Doe not vexe Thy ſelfe,come wee re at large, our eonſtitution Would ha beene troubled with a wife, wehave The world before us, ftore of game is neceſſary, The Putcheſſe.
Enter Dutche ſſe, F erraye, piure lu Luci
Laura Melinds. $5
Det. You now poſſe
, . $4{1/ {a+
Dat. Where's our letter? i wo, Ont A apes ren. = = No tho ——_—
And — Il in e — wen
«Sz % 12
Wud havent Ar. Your el .
Dat. Signi
vette Tar aus- ragen .
pos
dere on
1 1 '
* . - —
And
— ww + %
Wy-.ias
And know the Duke, 0 n
Aer. Tam one ofthe- „
Dat. No more, all's well. Mer. I' me glad ont. Urſ. Sir your bleſſing. Cor. Madam your (miles upon Deſpaire of happineſſe. Aer. But where's Borgia ? "65 291621 7 Bo, I knownot Siri. 40m T1 | _ r $407 } Ol | imponio w * ” 381 £5734 Det, What' . {1
Is. A foole has loſt his maſter and ws cies About the Court. ; wid
* 4 ” F : 2 — 9 1 15
«7 . - »
1fany man arebe In towne or in conntree - 6b
Caa tell me ofa wighe Wos loſt but yeſter His name was I know - Signior Aurelio, kit 27 Bytheſe markes he is knowyne,/ 1103 2
He had a buſh of his © 5 my ** Two eyes in $395" Ve 11:1” - «6 \J And a noſe on his n e | Hisbeards very chinne Mi 12 * „ 1002 eee + & 1 bs Y 5: i 44
Take what youean ety det And heaven bleſſe M
And I know no 1 0) ho, Cor, i > rf Aer, Nor my ſonne.
OP Ils too eee
2 ſquid” - 85 * Ire 703 ο, 3 Altena 290 . G09 4.21
The
Opportunitie.
Pim. No, no, that's Signior Forgia,doe not deceive your ſelſe
Bo, We are both de . 4 1 Of your free pardon Madam for all treſpaſſes?
My Lord your breath js powerfull,
Dat. Riſe Aurelio.
Fer. And bedeare to us,
Aler. T hope the pardon's firme.
Dut, Irrevocable.
Mer. Ile diſpatch letters then to Naples, chenee He did 3 — were we coſend!
But Sir I thanke you for my Borgias pardon,
Cor, Although it be cleare now 2 my brother Pray take my poore acknowledgement, Iſhall Be proud for your ſake;to preſerve your ſriendſhip.
Bor. May your hopes proſper in him; now we two Wirh licence of your nd mins. may Proſecute our defigne agen for the warres.
Dut, If nothing elſe at Court invite your ſtay Welay commands upon you as our ſervant That you ſee all our ceremonies figiſh'd,
To celebrate this happy union You muſt be both our guefts.
Pim Doe let us feaſt | And fortifie our ſelves, weſhall have Oar bellies full of fighting time enough. Pif. Thinkes — mon ſo?
Du. Subjects may love as their rude ſenſe imparts, But heaven doth how rne Princes hearts.
'
FINTIS,
