Requested Title: TIlE PLAYHOUSE To BE LET
Authors: Sir William Davenant
Matched Alias: Play-House to be Let
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1475-1640_the-works-of-sr-william-_davenant-sir-william_1673
Source Title: The works of Sr William Davenant Kt... 1673
Source Author: Davenant, Sir William.
Source Date: 1673
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/davenant_works_1673_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from Davenant's collected works searchtext with a clean title header and play opening.

---
Play-houſle abs Let.
— ———
PROLOGUE.
Tnce you affeF things new, what I'm to ſay, & Shall be as great a Novel as our Play, Cuſtom: would have me ſpeak a Prologue now, But that we may intire adherence ſhow
To Novelty (which in the Mode of Plays
Like ſoveraign Nature over Cuſtom ſways )
1 mean my Prologue ſhall a Riddle bes;
And thus propound it to the Company.
A teeming Muſe big with imagination, Conceiv d a Monsiter of ſo new a faſhion That of the haſty birth, bing brought to Bed, We ſound it neither had a Tail or Head. The Limbs are ſuch, as no proportion bear, No correſpondence have, and yet cohere : Of ſeveral uſe, and ſeveral forms they be, Tet in the whole contexture they agree :
They are disjoyn'd and yet united too, Which cannot but a Monſter ſeem to-you 3 Tet ſuch a Moniter 'tis, as you'l admit Foy Pleaſure, and ſtill pay for Nurſing it.
T ſte y are puzl'ds; but we jo diſpiſe Th advantage we might make by a ſurpriſe, That to unridle this, you here may come And joyn your Heads together in one Room, Where, for your Money, you ſhall ſit. at eaſe, Two hours a day, till Chriſtmas zf you pleaſe.
The Firſt ACT.
The &CENE opens, and upon two Stools are diſcover'd the Tire- woman and Chair-woman, one (helling of Beans, and the other
Sowing. | x Enter Player and Houſe-Keeper.
Play. For the Long Vacation. You may een dry.'em In the Sun, and lay 'em up in the Tiring-houſe
For the Players: they may get Bacon to 'em
When the Term comes.
Hat, ſhelling of Beans? *'tis a proper work
Howſ.K.
68
The Play-Heuſe to be Let.
et
= — —
Houſ:K. Nay you may work on too, 'tis Holpital ware, Courlte ſhirts for the poor Poets. - [ Knocking hard at Dore.
Play. Are they mad? ſure they take the Play-houtle for The Church-yard o're the way and mean to wake Our dead Neighbours. What would you have? -{[ Knocking agen,
Tir.W. Pray knock civilly. I believe it is Some Country Poet with a ſtock of Plays. He brings his Ware to ſel] when the Fares's done. [ Knocking agen.
Play. Some Univerlity Mule is in hard lahour, And 'ſhe takes our Tire- woman tor a Midwife. Open the Dore. T Exit Houſ. K. and enter again with Monſieur.
Monſ. Be you von, two, tree of de Teatre.
Houſ.K. We are ſtanding properties of the Play-houſe, Which, in vacation, lye in pawn for the Rent,
Monſ. Dat is vel, bi de Bill de Houſe is to let,
' Play. 'Tis to let, but you, Sir, knock'd fo hard
As if you meant to take it by aſſault.
Moni. Sir, me beſeſh your pardon, and vill give De good mony vor de Rent dis Vacation.
Houſ:K. What would you do in't? we muſt like your Trade Before we lect our Shop, leſt we ſhould ride With John Dory to Paris to ſeek Rent.
Monſ: Mi vil'make Preſentation of de Farce.
Tir.lW, Farces, what be thoſe? New French Bobs for Ladies?
Play. Pray-peace; I under(t:nd the Gentleman. |
Your Farces are a kind of Mungril Plays.
#
But, Sir, I believe all French Farces are Prohibted Commodities, and will Not pals current in England.  Monſ. Sir, pardon me; de Ergelis be more Fantaſtick den de Franſh. De Farce Bi allo very fantaſtick, and vil paſle. Play. The Monſieur's in the right; for we have found
Our Cuſtomers of late exceeding humorous.
Monſ. De viſe Nation bt for tings heroique, And de fantaſtique, vor de Farce !
Tire.IW. I like not that theſe French pardonne-moys ſhould make ſo bold with old Fzgland.
Houſ:K. Peace, Woman ; Weel let the Houſe, and get money.
Play. But how will your French Farce be underſtood? For all our travell'd Cuſtomers are gone * To take the Air with their own Wives, beyond Hide-Park a great way a homely Country.mode Of their Fore-fathers. NH
Tir.W. With grief we ſpeak its F; They may be aſham'd to leave their poor Miſtreffes And us behind 'em without Cuſtomers.
Play. Pray ſave your tears for our next Tragedy. The Aorſcerr's all for merry Farces, but | CAsT ſaid, Sir,) how ſhall we underſtand 'em?
Monſ. Me have a Troop of French Comazdien
- Dar ſpeak a litle very good Engelis.
Tir.W. Bleſs us! a Troop? Play. Woman, thou art no Linguiſt; they in France
>
The Play-bonſe to be Lett,
Call a Company of Players, a Troop.. Tir. W. | thought he had ta'ne our long Tennis-Court For a Stable. ' Play. And you are ſhelling Beans for his Horſes. [ Knocking without again. Heuſ.K. Our Bill at the Door draws in morc Cuſtomers. | [Exit Houſe-Keeper. Play. Houſe-Keeper, look out! Monſieur, you may draw up your Troop of Farcers Within the Pales, they may chance to give us A ſhort trial of their proweſs in Poetry. Mons. Vel, Sir, you fal fee trange ting. { Exit Monſienr. Play. Who 1s't that knock'd ? [ Enter Houſe-Keeper, Houſ:K. Nay there's a couple. Play. What are they? | Houſ:K. Men 1n their ſhirts doing Penance, For the moſt ſcandalous fin of Poverty ; Two very hot Fencers without doublets: They wouid hire our Play-houſe. Play. For what ule? Houſ.K. For a School, where they'd teach the Art of Duet Which is a fit trade in the long Vacation 3 For nothing makes young Gentlemen ſo quarrelſom As want of money. | | Play. Tell 'em the Red Bull (tands empty for Fencers. There are no Tenents in it but old Spiders : Go bid the men of wrath allay their heat With Prizes there. | Honſ.K | told,'em of Parcras-Church, where their Scholars (When they have kill'd one another in Duel) Have a Church-yard to themſelves for their dead. | Knocking again. Play. Bid ;em march off. [_Exit Houle-Keeper. We'll let this Theatre and build another, where, : At a cheaper rate, we may have Room for Scenes. Brainford's the place! Perhaps 'tis now ſomewhat to far 1'th' Suburbs; Byt the mode is for Builders to work ſlight and faſt; And they proceed ſo with new houſes, That old London will quickly overtake us.
Enter Houſe-Keeper, Muſitian and Porter bearing Caſes ſer Inſtruments.
Houſ.K. I've brought the man, who, without the Merchandize of two Cats, fhall make us all rich 17hitinetons.® Play. Hey, what have we here? A load of Tombs for dead Fiddles? Muſ. I find, Sir, by your Bills you'd let the Play-houſe. Play. We would find means to live, this dead Vacation. Muſ. That is; you wou'd have a good round Rent for it. Play. Which you'll ſcarce pay by playing Sellingers-ronnd, Muſ. Your wit, Sir, will never grow up to madneſs: 'Tis only the fume of an empty ſtomach. You may recover in the Term, when you Get money to get meat, K
72
The Play- Houſe to be Lett.
Play. Pretily well faid; but however, Sir,
You {hould have been fare of our Shop before
You brought 1n your Ware, Mu. Reſt you merry.
There is another Play-houſe to let in rere-treet. Houſ.K. This man of mufick has more in his head
Than meer Crotchets. I pray a word, Sir :
I am the Houſe-Keeper. 1ſ: You may lleep out your Office, Sir.
 Y are not like to be wak'd with viſitants. [Going on.
Play. Sir, under your favour, let's not part thus. Pleaſe but-to clear the miſt which you brought with you.
Muſ. Well, Sir, be brief.
Play. Why came you with ſuch confidence to- take The Houſe, as made you bring your Furniture Before we treated for the Rent?
Muſ: Becauſe I thought you had been more in love
' With your profit, than with your wit.
Play. I, that's the- point ? whence ſhould -our profit riſe ? Auf. I meant to entertain the People with
A Novelty 3 which I ſuppoſe 1s no
II bait for thoſe ſmall Fiſhes, which I thought
Mine own, and purpos'd you a ſhare 1th' Net.
Play. But what's the compoſition of your Bait ? Muſ. I wou'd have introduc'd Herotque ſtory In Stilo Recitativo. Play. In Stilo Recitativo? 'tis well; I underſtand you, Sir. But do you think
That natural? | .
Mzuſ. Becaulc 'tis not in cuſtom You therefore think, Sir, it is out of Nature? Play. It ſeems ſo, Sir, to me, unleſs you would Metamorphiſe men into Birds. Suppoſe I ſhould not aſk,; but fing, you now a queſtion, And. you ſhould inſtantly ſing me an anſwer 3 Would you not think it ſtrange?  Muf. Well, Sir, as how ? [ Plays and Sines. Play. Take out your Watch, and tell me, Sir, the hour ? Then you reply, - My Watch, Sir, is at Pawn, bur 'tis paſt Four. Af. Your heart is good, Sir, but y*are an i Mimick In Muſick, and your voice does breed ſome doubt Of your Virginity. Play. You'd make me bluſh If there were ſtrangers here; but if you pleaſe Ceaſe your rebukes, and proceed to inſtruction. Muſ. Recitative' Muſick 1s. not compos'd Of matter fo familiar, as may ſerve For every low occaſion of diſcourſe. In Tragedy, the language of the Stage Is rais'd above the common dialect; Our paſſions riſing with the height of Verſez =» And Vocal Muſick adds new wings to all '
Fg
The pate of Poetry. [Knocking within noads.
Hou. K.
4
»
* The Pliy-honſe to be Lett. -"”
Houſ:K.' Look out again! there's a freſh Cuſtomer. | | . | Exit Tire-Woman. Play. Be pleas'd, Sir, tg retire awhile, and tune Your Inſtruments. You fhall make trial of The length and depth of all the Ears we have. k- Myſ: T'll chuſe the Womens Tiring-Room for privacy. Play. You may 3 for they are gon, Sir, to rob Orchards, And get the Green-f1cknefs in the Country. | Exit Muſician and Porter at one Door. Enter Tire-Woman at the other.) Tir. WW. "There's fuch a crowd at door,. as if we had A new Play of Gundamar. | | ſ RP Play: See who they be. [Exit Houſe-Keeper. Our Bill has been up but two days, and I perceive We ſhall have uſe again of our Wardrobe. Go Woman ! drive away the Moths; For they arc grow" as big as Butterflies. [ Exit Tire-Woman,
Enter Houſe-Keeper with a Dancing-Maſter,
Houſ.K. All the dry old Fools of Bartholomew Fair Are come to hire nur houſe. The German Fool, T:r: Boridge of Hamb'rongh, and numberleſs Jack-Puddings; the new motion men of Norwich, Op'ra-Puppetsz the old Gentlewoman _ That profeſles the Galliard on the Rope 3 Another rare Turke that flies without wings, Rich Juglers with imbroider'd Budgets; Hoop-men, And ſo many Tom-Tumblers that you'd think Lincolns-Inn-Field a Foreſt of wild Apes. k Play. Your Tumblers may trot hence, your Jugglers roo May e'en paſs and repaſs away to Southwark; | But, till the nation be more civiltz'd, Your Fool and Devil may be entertain'd ; They'l get money 3 none now but very choice Spectators will vouckſafe to fee a Play - Without 'm. Pray, what 1s that Gentleman? . E.- . Hoxſ.K. Not a ſpectator, Sir3 but one that would Fain hire our Houle to draw ſpeCtators hither, Play. What 1s your Myſtery? Dax.M4. Hiltorical dancing. Play. How ? high Hiltory upon Ropes? | Danc.Ma. Fie no, Sirz I'm for down-right plain hiſtory Expreſt in figures on the floor, a kind Of morals in dumb ſhows by Mea and Beaſts. play. Without any Interpreter ? Danc. Ma. Pardon me, Sir; the Audience now and then Muſt be inform'd by Chorus's in Rhime. | play. O, dumb-ſhows with ſpeeches? _ Danc.Ma. Yes, Sir, the ſame: but very ſhort. play. I apprehend: you, Sir, if theſe be not Novelties, F'll to Sea, and ſtrait ſeek our | A new World to find 'em. Theſe will take rarely, / Houſ.K. Wee'l buy Shovels to keep our Money from ruſting. Play. Well, my dear fantaſtick friends of Lodo,
Who love Novelty, and would ſcorn to took - | K 2 , Even
74 "The Play-Houſe to be Lett.
Even on the Moon, but that ſhe changes often. | And becomes new; I hope we ſhall pleaſe you now. [ Knock.again.  Houſ:K. Another man of Myſtery ! | [ Exit Houl. K. Play. Sir, paſs the back way over to the Grange;
-& An Inn where you may bait your Men and Beaſts;
| And wee'l be for you ſtrait. [ Exit Danc.Ma.
— —
Fnter, at the other door, Houſe-Keeper.
Hoenſ:K. Here is one Goodman John Leyden deſires To ſpeak with you and he does amiſs great ſatisfaftion By a word to the Wiſe. Flay. Tell him, the Wiſe are not at leiſure now To hear his Sov'raignihip. What would he have? Houſ.K. He would hire the Turband, Scepter,.and Throne of our Solymar the Magnificent; and reign This long Vacation over all the dominions In Portugall- Row. | : Play. He was an Enemy To.the exil'd Comicks: I will not hear him. | Houſ:K. Conſider well ! He'll draw ſpectators hither. | Play. Yes, ſuch as will give no more to ſee him here Than in the ſtreet to ſee a Blazing Star. | ' Money is the main material of Rent: Your Kings of Munſter pay in prophecies only. Houſ:K He has a Ream of Paper about him : They are Bills of Exchange or Prophecies, Play. Bills of Exchange fign'd long ago at 1u»ſter. Bid him be gone. - Houſ:K. He's not ſuch an enemy to the Comicks, As one without 1s a Foe to him 3 One who deſires admittance too. Play. What 1s he? Houſ:K. A man of  Meeter, a Poet. | Play. Diſmiſs your Doling, and let in your Poet. We muſt be eyer ciyil to the Muſes : *  Hexſ:K. The Poet has a ſpecial Train behind him, Though they look lean and empty, Yet they ſeem very full of invention. Play. Let him enter, and ſend his Train to our Houſe-Inn, the Grarge. [Exit Houſe-Keeper. Virgil himſelf, as ancient Poets ſay, | . Was once a Groom, and liv'd by Oats and Hay.
Enter Houſe-Keeper and Poet.
Poet. The Bill upon your door ſhews that Your Houſe was not of late much haunted. Howuſ:K. Not with Play-vilitors, nor is it now With Spirits, for you ſee none are afraid To hyre it. _ Tar: Poet. I did not ſuſpect, Sir, it could be haunted With Spirits, for you Players never hide money. Play. You Poets do; for 'tis but ſeldom, Sir, That any has been found about ye. | Poet. D'you ſet up of your ſelves, and profeſs Wit
The Play-houſe to be Lett. 75
Without help of your Authors? Take heed, Sirs ! You'l get few Cuſtomers.
Houſ.K. Yes, we ſhall have the Poets.
Poet. 'Tis becauſe they pay nothing for their entrance. But, my friends, leave off the endeavour to | Grow witty without occalion. I pray Be in earneſt. Do you mean to get money ?
Play. That's the cauſe why we endeavour at wit.
Poet. Wit will not do your work alone.
You muſt have ſomething of a newer ſtamp to make your Coyn current. Your old great Images of | Love and Honour are eſteem'd but by ſome Antiquaries now. You ſhould ſet up with that Which is meer new. What think you Of Romances traveſti Play. Explain you elf. _ Poet. The Garments of our Fathers you muſt wear The wrong ſide outward, and in time it may Become a faſhion. |
Houſ.K, It will be ſtrange, and then 'tis ſure to take.
Poet. You ſhall preſent the aCtions of the 'Heroes, (Which are the chiefelt Theams of Tragedy)
In Verſe Burleſque. |
Play. Burleſque and Traveſti? Theſe are hard words, And may be French, but not Law-French.
Take heed, Sir, what you ſay; you may be queſtion'd for'. We would do nothing, Sir, but what is legal. |
Houſ:K. If it be French, TI pray tranſlate it to us. |
Play. \Good, Sir, no French tranſlation till the Tearm 3 [t is too precious for Vacation-ware.
Moſt of the men of judgment are retir'd
Into the Country, and the remainder that
Are left behind, come here not to conſider - But to be merry at ſuch obvious things
As not conſtrain 'em to the pains of thinking.
Poet. Would you avoid Tranſlations out of Frexch?
Play. We had a trial here of ſo much force As humane wit could bring, but truly, Sir,
The number of our Cuſtomers (for whom Our Shop is chiefly open in Vacation) Aﬀe&t Commodities of lefler price.
Poet. You meet my judgment in a direct line.
Play. The French convey their arguments too much In Dialogue: their ſpeeches are too long.
Poet. Indeed, ſuch ſingle length in their debates Bears ſome reſemblance with that famous Duel, Which, in the fields of Finsbary, was fought. Whilom at Rovers with long Bow and Arrows:
It began at Day-break, and ended at
Sun-ſetting 5 whilſt they each did gather up
The weapons which the other ſhot, and ſent Them back again with like effec. |
Play. Such length of ſpeeches ſeem not ſo unpleaſing As the contracted walks of their deſigns.
Poet.
>
$6
76 4 T he Play-heuſe to be Lett.
ET. CCC —__—_—=
Poet. Which are as narrow as the Allies in | Our Citty-Gardens. Play. I perceive you take the Air ſometimes within the Walls of I o»dow. | Poet. If I agree with you in finding your "Diſeaſe, it is ſome lign that I may know Your remedy 3 which 1s the Traveti, I mean Burleſque, or, more t'explain my ſelf, Would fay, the Mock-herotque muſt be it Which draws the pleaſant hither 1'th Vacation, Men of no malice who will pay for laughter. Your bufie Termers come to Theatres, As to their Lawyers-Chambers, not for mirth, Bur, prudently, to hear advice. Play.. You'd take our Houſe for Poetry- burleſque? Poet. | would, and introduce fuch folly as ſhall | Make you wilſez. that 1s, ſhall make you rich. | Play. Well, we'll be content, like other rich Fools, To be Jaught at. There is an old tradition T hat in the times of mighty Tamberlane, ! Of conjuring Favtus, and the Beauchamps | bold, You Poets us'd to have the ſecond day. This ſhall be-ours, Sir, and to morrow yours. a#Þ Poet. I'll take my venture, 'tis agreed ! Play. You bring materials with you to ſet up? Poet, My Mock-Burleſquers are without. Play. Condud *em to the Wardrobe, Sir, where you May take your choice of Cloaths- and properties : Only, give way, Sir, to your Predeceſſors; The proverb does appoint the firſt that come To be firſt ſerv'd. Here is a Morſjeur with . His Farce ; A ſpiritual Muſician too With his ſeraphick Colloquies expreſt In ſtilo recitativo. Honſ.K. And hiſtorical Dancers that diſperſe Morality by ſpeeches in dumb-ſhows. Poet. Well I will take my turn, I muſt come laſt. But, to declare my ſelf a linguiſt, Sir, I dare pronounce, Finis coronat opus. [ Exit Poet. Enter Tire-woman at the other door. TIr.. The crowd are haſt'ning to our doors, as if —— Play. It were to ſee an old at I a hang'd. What is the bus'neſs? Tir.W. They would come in, and ſec ſtrange things for _— Houſ.K. They follow'd the Porter that Brought the load of Mufick. Play. A man may bring a Pageant through the ſtreets As privatly upon my Lord Mayor's day, As a burden of V1ol-caſes hither. Tir.W. The fat Gentleman delfires he may come in; He that has but one hand. Play. He 1s our conſtant friend ; A very kind and a hearty ſpedtator + ; One who ne'r fails to clap at ev'ry Play.
The Play-houſe to be Lett. 77
—_— — ——
Houſ:K. How can he clap with one hand ? be? Ply. 'Troth, the good man makes ſhift, by laying his Plump cheek thus--- then with ſuch true affetion Does ſo belabour it.--- He ſhall conie in. Woman, bid him haſten to the back-door. Houſ'K. We have ſome half hearted friends who clap cokily As if they wore furr'd Mittens. Flay. We muſt provide our Party 'gainſt to morrow ; Watch at the doors before the Play begins, And make low congies to the cruel Criticks As they come 1n 3 the Poets ſhould do that; | But they want breeding, which is the chief cauſe That all their Plays miſcarfy. Houſ.K, There 1s leaſt malice 1n the upper Gallery, For they continually begin the plaudit. Play. We'll hire a dozen Laundry-Maids and there Diſperſe * em, Wenches that uſe to clap Linen They have rough hands, and will be heard. Houſ.K.They ſhall be heard, or els we'll make 'em bring Their Laundry-Battledores. Pliy. Go, Guardian of the houſe, beſtir your ſelf; Houſe K.. And bid. our new Projeftors to make haſte: - If you will lend *em clothes and properties, I'll fit fome of our Scenes for their occaſions. Play. Let them begin in order, and to work. This is their day of trial, whilſt we fit Like two judicious Magiſtrates of wit. The Spaniſh Poet had fix hours to do, | What we dull Ezei/ifh undertake in two. [Exennt ſeveral ways.
The Second ACT.
Exter Gorgibus, Celie weeping, Servant.
Celie. H tinke not myn Art vill conſant to dat.
Gore. . Doe you grom-bell littel impertinant. - Vat vould your young fantalque braine govarne mi Raiſon paternell, Vich ſold give de Law De Fader or de Chile. You ſold be glad Of ſuſh a Huſband. You will ſay you be ignorant Of his humeur, bute you know he 1s riſh,
He has terty touſant Duckat, and derefore Is honeſt Gentill man.
Celie. Helas! my Arte!
Gore. If de colore ſoud mi ranſport, I foud/ Make you fing helas in anoder facon. 7 R Dis is de fruit of de Romance, fling me In de fire, dos paplers dat vill your head Vit Colibets, ende rede de Stanzas of Pibrac.
Ende de Tablets of de Confilier 1aties Viche vill teach you to follow mi dire&ion:
Am I not Gorgibns your Vader. SO. Celie.
The Play-bonſe to be Lett.
79
At de ſtrange coldneſs of his late affection.
Celie. Ah Vader vill you datl forgete d'amitie Dat-I vow to Tele, I fond be blame _ If vit out your conlantT diſpoſe min perſon, Bute your ſelf did give min fait to his oat. Gore. Lelie is vell accomplis bute all ting Muſt ſubmit to,de good occaſion of Richeſ(s; de riſhe perſon vill come dis nite, If I ſee you regard him vit de helas | I fall vell I ſay no more— | [ Exit. Serv. Madam, I finde tis convaniant to have Pe Huſband to ly vit one in de cold nite, De Ive Berry viche ſhow finely on de Tree Ven ſeperate 1s good for no noting ; peace be Vit min dead Aarti. 1 did tinke it redicule To ule de cerimony of ayring de ſheet In de vinter, bute now I ſhake and quiver In de Dog days. Celie. Sall I comit de forfat of de vou In abandon Zelie vor dis uglea perſon? Sery.. Your Lelie is but Aſle to let his Voyage ſtop him ſo long, de length of his diſtance Make me ſugeſt ſome ſhange. Celie. Ah do not fink me dead vit de preſage. Serv. I know you love him muſh tenterly. { Celia draws forrh Lelie's Pidure and gtZing 0: it falls into a found.
Madam, from vence procede dis. Ah! ce falls Into a ſonde! Hey quickely, Ho la Help ſome bodey. fs Us. - | Enter Sganarelle. Sear. Vat is de matter. : ._ Serv. Myn Matreſſe is dying. Sear. Is dat all? I did tink all vas loſt to hear Suſh cry, but mi vill aproſh her., Madam, tell me If you be dead. Hey! ſee ſay noting. Can [I believe her vit out her .vorde. Serv. [ vill veche ſome body to carry her a'vay. Vill you old her uppe ? | 0400 [ Exit Servant. Sean. See 1s colt every vere. I vill feel if
Her mout give debreat+ Leta me feel a littel. F Lays his hand on her
By my trot me know not, bute me doe finde } Freaf?. Some ligne of de Iife———— | Sganarelle's Wife looks ont of the Window. Wife. Ah! vat I ſee, a Damoſelle in de armes Of myn Uſband? I will goe doone. He betray me, Ende I will ſurpriſe de villaine Huſband. | Sean. Vee muſt depefh to ſucor her ; ſhe-vil Be to blame to let her ſelf dy : to:goe To toder vorltss grand ſottiſe van vee May carry in dis. | ſ\ Exit carrying her out. Enter Sganatelle's Wiſe. Wiſe. Ha! is he already flay, vay vit his Dilicate Minion. . Mi vondert. not muſhe:
-
_
— _ The Plaz-huxſe to be Lett,
79
De ingrate doe reſerve his careſle for oder. Ah how angry be [ dat de Law does not Permet de Vife change Huſband as de Smock: Dat voud be commode. But vat doe I finde—— De Enamail is finguliat; de Graving Charming; me vill open it. — [ Opens the PiFure. Enter Sganarelle. | Sean. Dey tonght her dead ande ſee is live again As de Harang in de Sea. Ha ! min vife here! Wife. O even! a Picture of man, of fine perſonage? *{ Sganarelle looks over his wifes ſhoulder. Sgar. Vat does ſee conſider vit ſo muche attention. Dis Pifture ſpeake no good ting to min honeur I feel de littel horne on mi bro. Wife. De vorke is hore vort den de Gold. It ſmells ſucet. Sean, Vat a plague! does ſee kifle it? Wife. Vou voud not be attacque by ſuſh fine man? Ah vy has not min Uſband ſuſh bon men. But min Uſband has de vil'd palt-pate.
ys .
Sean. Ah Curr Beeſh'! | [| $natches the Piffure from ber.
Doe mi ſurpriſe you in your vantones, In meditation to 1njure your uſband, [Is not min morſell ſufficiant to | . , Stay your ſtomach, but-muſt you taſte de Haut gout of a Gallant. | Wife. Dat is good jeaſtz you tink bi 'tis finees To evade min complaint. Sean, Let oders be made Tom-foole, de caſe is Plane in min hand, a token of your Amours. Wife, Min anger has allready too muſh' occaſion, Tink not to keep dat from me. Sgan. May I not as vell make muſh of de Copie, As you of de Originall. Wife. Verefore you ſay dis, you keep de Miſtris in your arms. VellI can ſee your trick. Sean. 'Tis is de fine boy, de minion of de Bed, de dainty Drolle vit vome.—— Wife, Vit vome? proceed, —— Sgar. Vit vome, I fall tell tee in time, Wife. Vat does de good man drunkard means by tis? Sean. Goody (lutt you underſtand me too vell. My name fall be no more AMorftexr Sgararelle, But mi lore Cuckot; mi fall make your body leflſe By vone arme, ande two ribe. : Wiſe. You dare continew dis diſcours to put Me off, of de tought of your Miſtris. Sgan. Ande you dare play me dis divellis trieF. Wife. Vat divilis trick, ſpeaka? AY Sean. 'Tis not vort min labeur to cotnplaine now, Bute you provide min brou vit a fine Feadar of a Buck. | : Wife. Vell, after you give me de molt ſenſible injure Dat can invite a Voman to great vengance. | You voud amuſe me vit counterfeit anger
7 Play. Foe i to ib Lett.
| To prevent deffect of myn reſentment. You make-de offence, and begin de quarrel]. Sean. Rare impudence, you carry it cunningly To make me tink you vertuous voman. Wife. Goe to your Miſtreſles ande. careſſe dem; Bute returne min picture vit out more trick. [She ſnatches away the PiUlure and runs out. $gar.You tink to ſcape me,butel vill ave it once more.{ Ryns affer. | Enter Lelic.  Lelie. Min Arte does abandon me teo muſh To feare. De Fader has promeſle allwaies, And Ceclie has manifefle dat love Viche ſupport min hope. Enter Sganarelle. Sear. I ave got it from de baggage mi vite. Ee at the (ight of Lelie, and compares the Picure with his face. De Devil is not ſo like de Devil, as dat face 1s to dis. Dat is de Villain dat make me de trange
Ting call'd de Cuckol. [Lebe ſpies the Pidare in his hands. Lelie. Vat dol ſee? if dis bi min pitture :
Ah Celie vat foud I tink of ti love?, [ aſide. Sgan. Ah pauver Sgamarelle, to vat deſtine
Is dy reputation,expole now ? [ dfode, Lehe. Dis to! does alarme mi credence. [ Alide.
Is it departed from de faire hand, To wiche I gave it one time. Sgar. [ fall be diſcern'd between two fingers,
In de Ballade vit horus.on mi bro. | [Aﬀde. Lelie. Do min eies deceive min heart? | 4ſde. Sgan. AhVillain baſt, dow de courage to make |
A Cuckol of $genarelle in de fleur of his age. [ Aſide.
Lelie. Min eies dos not fheate me 3: *'tis min owne picture. [ Sganarelle turning his back to him.
Sgan. De man 1s cunning. Lelie. Min ſurpriſe is exceeding. Sgarn. Vat voud he ave.
Lelie. I vill accoſte him. : | Aftde. MaylI Hey! of grace, a vord., |  [Afde.
Sean. Vat voud he ſay?
Lelie. May. I obtain de faveur to. know now How dat picture came to your hande?
Sean. Pardon me; 1 vill adviſe a. littel—— He compares the Begar, tis mi man, or rader. tis . : coin and. Le- Mi Vives man. lies face together.
Lelie. Put me out of paine and-ſay: from veme it came.
Sgan. Dis picture viche does vex/ you, ,js your reſemblance.
It vas in de'hand of your acquarntance.
De ſweet ardeur betweene mi Lady ande yau,, is koown
To me, bute, I fall deſire you hereafter
To maks no more ſuſh kine of love to injure
De Huſband, and to abuſe our marriage. Lelje. Vat do-you meane her, from vome you had dis token? Sean. See 1s min Vife, andI am her Huſband.
Leljie. Her Huſband? , | | Sgan.
CN 4 WEE s O-Ring YN Ss 4A 1 0 = pes. 7 20h FP ONT sA R$. o p Saks Porn Fung OS 90 nn 6 ape ad o j % r; # . E 1 0; bps E-Y-- . £ CO FINS, $704 > Fn 974 Y . P x A
28 ob
PR FE, CE I—_
& he Ply-buſet ro TY Lt.
4 .
 Sgar. Yes, her Huſband; -and a very A Huſband, you know de occafion.
Andel fall acquaint her Parents Mit i. 44+: * v [ weed
- 4, Lelie. Ah vat have I heard? I 'vas fold vw new Eſpouſe "Vas ugly as de Devil. After touſant proteſtation- From de unfaitful mout couds don ſhange me For _ A _ _—_ Im affront . T vit de toyle of nine a Db give me on de ſodains » chooque * uſb Violence dat min Arte begin to fayle. © © Enter Sganarelle's Wiſe. wife. [ vill ſeek min perfidious huſband; did you not os An ugly knave paſſe dis vay?— Helas! Vat is it dat troubll dis fine Gentelman? You are mn to fall downe vit ſickneſs. | Lelie. Tis ſickneſs dat take me on de ſodaine. Fiſe. I be feare you vil fall in de ſound In compaſlion let me lead you to the Porch of min Houſe, You may fit down a vile to recover. Lelie. Vor a moment I accept dis faveur. | gies theme at his Porch. __ - Enter Sganarelle. Sgan, Ah! vat do'l ſee? I dy! dere-is no queſtion Of de coppie of de picture, now I finds | Min Vife vit de original. Inot Dare enter in mine houſe, vor fear of mine collere * And vor more fear dat his collere ſhould be ? Greater then mine own l | wife, Maks not ſitſh haſte avay, your fi ckneſſe [Exit Wife. If you depart ſo ſoon vil take you agen. oy Lelie. No, no, I give you all tank imaginarie Vor dis obligeing faveur. T am recover” Sean. Dit is — dey diſguiſe all vit tvilitvess ; He perceive me3 let ſee vat he vill ſay. Enter Celie, and Lelie gazes on hos . Lelie. Min Art revive, dis object mi ifiſpire. | But I fond now min ſelve condamne vor mir Injuſt tranſportz ſee can not be blame. ' If be de error of fortune dat vill hy No let me ave a. Vife ſo delicate. [Exit Sgan. ſees not Celie, but looks after Lelic's going one. - Sgan. Ven he caſts Seep Eies toward min houſe, DenlI ſoud tink he voud make me one Ramme- Celie. Lelie has appear juſt now to min” Eie5 | Min cruel Fader has conceale from me His returne from-his voyage. | T7 Sear; Vat min Vife doe may be in civilitie Ande compliment to him; de compliment ve” Be good ſometime: but 'tis no good faſon ” To Saks de Uſband. Cuckol. Vel ſal [ Lament vit out revange? . Celie.. Sir, de Gentilman "i before you Juſt now, vere did you know him? . _, Sgan. Helas! 'tis not mi, Madam, dat know him, But it is he dat kno min Vife. . L 2
8t
CM Os IIS ve Fe Sa: 3-7 "nth Serbs wag LOT RS ane Ge ea LL . eee WT. . 7 PE! We " RS Ld EL dnndk War rattiy nt oe ns ro oe ea ERAS Se irony en tk ICU a tat þ : EY SES bots EH RE oe; IE ES oa ed T6:54, RIP ents £5 DO As AS Pere) hs 6 4 ps 4; = + 4 4 g £ * ; 74 Þ; Is, AuY , 4 4 44 2 $4 A AY : . - L 4 > % " 1
jo G - "The Ploy-Honſe to w + Tow
Celie. Vat Sox give tro-bell to your, Eſprit? | Sgan. Madam, I ave great diſpolitiqn to cry. Seamrarelle is rob of his honeur, bute _ Figa for honeur, 'I be rob of min reputation Vir de Nabeurs. | Celie. Vit your permiſſion tella me how? . Sear. Dat young Gental-man (I ſpeak xt vit reverance To his qualitee) make bole-vit grin Vaſe. : Celie. He dat now 'palle, by.? | Sgan. De ſame, he make muſhe of min vie In corner. Celie, Ah, mi did judge dat his ſecret returne From his voyage vit out min knowledge,
Vas preſage of loofe trick. Sgan. Madam, you cake min part. vit muſhe ſharitce,
You grieve vor poor Cuckol,. bute oders Of de vicked vorlt made laugh at dem. Celie. O Even! Is it poſtibel dat he tinke To live after dis perfidie? , Sgarn. Madam, he is not dying: he is ſteale vay To:cate de good pott <#9 make him abel To make me more Cuc Celie. Ah Traitre, rue? man vit Jobill Art. Ende vit no Soule. Sean. Minot kno if he ave ſoule, bute mi Vife be acquainted vit his body. | ' Celie. No torture is ſufficien vor his grand CrIMe.. . He deſerve to ly on de Rack. He doe ly allready at Rack an Manger, But dat doe him good ande me hurt. Celie. Helas de inconſtancy w Seer. Hey | Bute de ſigh vit out revange be [8ighs aloud. To no more propoſe den de bray of de Alle. Celie. Ah, injure de Arte dat never vas.infidel. $24. De,man dat make Cuckgol ave no jultice. Celie. *Tis too muſhg, ende deArte cannot tink + On it vit ont dying vit ;grief., ., Sgan. Be not too muſh in colere, Madam, I pray, My grief give you too great impr |  +;Celre. Tinke not I vill dy vit out a1. Fevenge 5. | | I.yall 1aſtantly, about it;  : ,_ ” [ Exit. gear. Trange ting dat her goodneſs promps her to: be Revenge vor me! mi tink her anger does, | Augment min diſgrace, ande;teache mi yat to doe, Begar I vill be revange vit grand fury: (Steps twoor three fleps ; Bute, Sg4rarelle, (oftely if you pleaſe! Tt nab © returns back. De Cuckol-maker may-be.myche valiant, . | Ande lay de Baſton on de back as he doe Jay de. Horne on mi head. *' He may kille me,  -. REN 'Tis better to ave de Horne den:no lite... If my vife has done injyre, let her grieve; Vy ſoud I cry dat doe no rong? 2 5K agen. . I begin to be ſenſible and vil ave de vengeance, Ande ſoundely,..vor,I vill yirſt tell de Kay Dat he ly vit min vite.
C_——_—_——E
Enter Gorgibus, Celie, Servant.
Celie. T am prepar'd to ſubmit to your vill ; Diſpoſe, Fader, of min vous ande of me; Ordonne mi vedding ven yau pleaſe.
Gorg. In trot de joy of dis doe tranſport me. If I not feel de Gout, my leg voud caper Vor joy of your obediance: you make mi Young as de chile, and I vill goe make de Preparation to make you gette de chile.
Serv. Dis ſhange be ting of vonder.
Celie. Ven you fall kno de motive dat conſtraia me
To dis faſon of doing you vill not yonder muſh. Serv. Dat may vell be, Celie. Kno Lelie invad min Art vit perfidie,
He is come from de voyage and vas vit——
" Serv. Look vere he come. | Enter Lelie. Lelie. Before dat vor perpetual time I fall depart
From you, I fall ——__ you juſtly.
Celie. Vat can you ave de confidance
To ſpeak vit me agen ? | Lelie. If I ſoud not reproſh you for your ſhoice,
I ver vicked mang live ! live contant .
Ende make muſh of vort mor eſpouſe.
Celie, Vell Traitre, mi vill live, ande mi deſfire
Soud be dat your Arte bg troubell to ſee. it.
Enter Spganarelle jm Armonr. Sgar. Bigar mi be deſp-rate, ende de-fy Man, Voman, and Chile dat make de Cuckol. Celie. Vat doe you turn your eles vit Same ende not anſer mi. | Lelie. Ah TI ave ſee too muſh. 'S Celie. Do dis object ſuffice to confond ti. Lelie. But it oblig you to bluſh rader, _ Sgar, My colere care not noo ane littel Pudding vor his valeur. , Lelie. Vat man be you dat tro-bill me? ende make Mi angry ! yit yom ved you vite? - Sgan. Vit ſome body, bute'mi be cunning As de Devil and vill no tell. 4p, Lelie, Vi be you armed in dis faſon? Sear. Perhaps 'tis my faſon vor fear it ſoud rain : Vat contantmant it vod be to-kill him? Sganarelle tak corage. Lelie. Vat you ſay? | . Sgan, Mi ſay notin bute about buſlnes
=
[ Exit.
Vit min ſelfe. - [He beats his ſtomach aud face,
Lelie. Dat is (trang man!
$g4r. If mi had tayle like de Lyon, mi voud Beat min body into courage.
celie. Dat obje& ſoud make you ane ſhame,
From vich your eyes ſeem to be vonded.” LeliF Yes mi know bi dat object, dat you be Guilty of infidelite inexcuſable.
- nr SV SE Ken ons Shs Sea died f aig} as tht . 1 * ; "INT ©; Ee att Ia SR ns OR Deo” : p | 1 8. of 2 gaps 6 2s, wi : OTF 4 LM TS 1 Sue be eb ang eds RT 6t%. PE Sao ot MESS i bon FW I Ly bAlets (34 we $8.4 ob he ane aan on SR ed re SORE ea i io IR a ES 12 ot EO SE a on WH "04 k 4X wa wb? 2 £61517 "fN By 4 Sg RETES.. 1 Oe Me LEE * POR: 0 IA" 4 . T3 : on GEES > ke.” } : [ 5 pes _
" The Play-bouſe to be Litt.
Sh EST a oo M: A l ” & it PE rs ns. 2 Wake Ponte Pro Son CUE ES, - C8 6 4 ” a aha 6, Y x I EC RIES Toe PEE no oa: eo oe, dt" RR ENT : 5 os; NS EC Res Rr Er 43 IR [4 . VT : of | SF 5 E : 2 2 # -, LY * J* x2
" The Play-bouſe to be Lett,
Sgan. Min Arte is littel as de Pin head. Celie. Ah, ceaſe before mi Traitre dis Cruel inſolence in your difcour. | |
- Sear. Begar ſee be more angry for mi, det: I be vor mi ſelve. Be generous, S#4rar:!, Ands kille him a littel as ſoon as he Sall turne his back—— [ Lelie Paſſung two or three Teps without de- [ien, makes Sganarelle return, who did approach to kill him. Lelie. Celiz, fince min diſcour move your colere, | T vill ſeem vell ſatisfait of your Arfe, © | Ende praiſe de choice it has made, | Celie. Yeſe, my choiſe is ſuſh as-noting can allter. Lelie. Yeſe, you doe vell in defending it. Fear. See is {tout voman ende does vel to defend Min cauſe: Sir, your amours bi not legall. But I'm viſe, elſe ſtrange. ſlatghter voud proceed. Lelie. From vence dis plaint ende brutal anger ? Sgar. Min vife is min in publique and yours in privat.' Lelie. Suſh ſugeſtion be redicule. Celje. Ah Traitre! dou kno vell to diſembel. Lelie. Vat be you alſo angry becauſe mi Teache him diſcretion? = Celie.. Make your diſcour to him: he knd too muſh. Sger. In trot, Madam, you oblige mi vit your Trobel in mi defence [| Emter Sganarelle's Wife, and ſpeaks to Celie. Wiſe. Vell ave I found you now one oder time? bs Mi ſee vat doe paſſe; bute you ſoud doe vell Not to ſeduce de heart of min veak Uſband. Celie. Vat 1s de occaſion of dis tempeſte? Wife. You ave as muſh conſcience as de Devil, Ven he be ſecke vit eqjing vieſh on Fryday. Celie. Vat conſcience, ſpeaka boldly, a $gan. No body ſend for your Company Caroyre. Doe you kerelle vit her vor defending mi? Dont feare, dy Gallante fall be taken avay. Cel. Goe, benot feare mi ave ſufh intantion; Dit be vone extraordinarie dreame. | | Lelie. Vat extravagance be dis. |, [ Turning toward: Celie. Serv. Vat be de ende of deſe Galantries. {Servant eps between De more mi liſten, de leſſe mi underſtand. ) Lelie her Miſtreſs. I ſee mi muſt be concerne. | - TILE Lelie. Vel, vat you fay? Serv. Make reſponſe in order and leta me ſpeak. Vat is it dat you reproſh to my Maitreſs? Lelie. De Infidel has change me vor anoder. Ende.upon de rumour of her being mary'd Mt vas tranſport vit grief not to be egall'd. Serv. Marry'd? to vome? KE-f# Lelie. To dat vonderfull Gentilman. [Points tb S$ganarelle. Serv. Vat, to him? _ | —_ LE | Lelie. Yelſe, en verite! | | Serv. Voo told yau ſuſh ting? Lelie. Himſelve. B gar. Begarr dis be true as de Sun ſhina;
*
-
The Play-houſe to be Lett. +
Dat I may be marryd to min Vife. Lelie. Mi did ſee you vit great tro-bell of Arte ſnaſh min picture. $gan. Vell; ende here it be. | Lelie. You tolda me de perſon from vome You did ſnaſh dis Token, vas bond to you Vit. de knot of mariage. $g4ar. Mi vas cunning to ſnaſh it 3 vor Vit out dat, mi now diſcover her vile amour, Wife. Vat itory bi tis, mi found it by ſhance Under mya veet; ande preſantly after: Mi got Monfieur in his veakneffe into min houſe. Mi kno not vome de picture reſemble. [ Shewing it Lelie. Celie. I vas de cauſe of dis adventure Of de picture-z vor mi let it-fall ven mi Vas by your care convey to- your houſe. : .* Serv. Vit out me dere had bin ſtrange miſpriſion. Sgar. Sall vee take dis as currant money of France, Ende tinke de horne vas 1maginaire. Wife. Min feare, is not depart (o ; own ; Sgan. Bi mi trot let-us tinke our lelve oneſt puple. Accept vit out delay de berregaine propoſe. | Wife. Take heed den of de Cudge!, if I learn new ting | Of your defigne in corner. [ Celie having zalkt aſide with Lelie. ' Celie. O Evens! 1f it be (o, vat ave I done? Vor tinking.you vit out true fait, mi ave Take in revange de unhappy reſolution Viche I did alvay rejet. Mi ave promeſle : To min Vader-— bute here he come. [ Enter Gorgibus. Lelie. Mi vill ſpeak vit him. Sir, you fee me returne Vit min firſt ardeur of true love, ende nou Mi hope you vill accomplis your promeſle : Touchant mi mariage vit Cele, Gorg. Sir, I ſee you returne vit de'ſame ardeaur, Bute mi reſolution ave found occaſion Sir, your hum-bill ſerviteur. Lelie. Vat, Sir, vill you ſhange min felicitie? Gorg. Yes, Sir, min daughter fall follow de Law. Celie. Helas! how fall min duty be expreſle? Againſt de honeur of min love? Gorg. Be dis ſpoken like de daughter to min Commandements. Vell you vill den retreat from | Your-inclination to Monſieur Yalere 2 [_Emter Villebrequic. Bute dere be his Vader, ſure he is come | To condus de buſineſle, Vat bring you here? Monſieur Yillebrequin #2 Ville. One important ſecfet dat I be tell Dis morning viche does break min-promeſs to you. Mi Son vome your Daughter did accept vor Eſpouſe, has in private deceiv'd us all. Gore. Vat be de intantion of dis? Ville. He has bin eſpquſed four mont to Life  Endede Lady being of goot alliance, Mi vant de power to break de Contratt Mi made to -you.
9--> ww
8 "* ts
SH
The Play-bouſe io be Lite.
Gorg. Vell let it broken, f ſo, vit out Yous leave your ſon Yalere be firſt ingage To anoder 3 mi cannot conceale from you, Dat my ſelve did make promeſle to my Daughter, dat Monſieur Lelie ſoud marry her, Hoo is come riche in virtu from his voyage, Ende fall ave her.
Ville. De choice pleaſe me vel].
Lelie. Ende it vill crowne mia life vit happineſle. Min Arte is leap out of min Breaſt-for joy.
Sean. Did ever ſome body tink himſelf more Cuckol den I. Vell, a viſe man may be Deceive ſometime, derefore to de Huſbands As a preſant I fall dis council bring, Dat is, tho you ſee all, believe no ting.
Gorg. Bi mi trot it fall be a new proverb, Ende vor de joy of dis conclufion Let us have a dance a la ronde.
Ville. M1 vill make one.
Gorg. Mi vill make two.
Wife. Ande mi vill make vone, two, tree.
8garn. Mi cannot dance, but fall veche one To Dat fall dance rare $zrabrard vit Caſtinier. [_ Exit: Sganarelle.
| They dance 4 14 Ronde. After the Dance S8ganarelle returns in a Buffoon habit, and dances a Jig, and fo the Farce ends.
The Song to the Dance a ls Ronde. I.
Mrs. Goſnel. H, Love 3s 4 delicate ting, . Ah, Love is a delicate ting,
In Vinter it gives de new Spring. Chorus. It makes de dull Duſh vor to dance | Nimbell as Monſiexr of France.
T.
Mrs. Goſnel. Ande dowgh it often. does make, Ande dough it often does make, De head of de Cuckol to akes, Chorus. ' Tet let him bute vinke at de Lover, Ande de paine vill quickly be over.
k 3.
Mrs. Goſnel. De Hucband mu#t ſtill vink a littel, De Husband mut ſtill vink a littel, Ande ſometime be blinde as a Bee-tell:
Chorus. Ande de Vife too ſome time mnt be, Ven he play trick as bline as he.
The End of the ſecond AC s. |
The Play-houſe to be Lett; | l s 7
The Thicd ACT: Exter Houſe-Keeper, Player.
Play. WY * now to take a farther voyage than | From Emgland into France, and think
Our ſelves with Captain Drake in the Weſt Indies. Houſ:K. Now we ſhall be in $tilo Recitativo.
I'm in a Trance, when I hear Vocal Muſick ;
And in that Trance, inclin'd to prophecie
That 'twill bring us inundatigns of ſhillings. Play. Thou underſtand'(t Recitative Muſick,
As much as a Dray-horſe does Greek.
—_—n Ry agg * Arr
THE ' HISTORY of SY FRANCIS DRAKE.
Expreſt by Inſtrumental and Vocal Muſick, and by A: of PerſpeQtive in Scenes, £c.
en I rn In We gs
; THE DISCRIPTION of the FRONTISPIECE.
upon the top of which 1s written, jn an Antick Shield, PERU;
and two Antick Shields are fix'd a little lower on the ſides, the one bearing the Figure of the Sx, which was the Scutcheon of the Incas, who were Emperors of Peru: The other did bear the $pread- Eagle, in fignification of the Auſtrian Family.
. N Arch is diſcover'd, rais'd upon ſtone of Ruſtick work
*
oÞ ns es
The Firſt ENTRY.
"Hf E preparation of the opexing of the Scene is by 4 Prelude and Corante. Afterwards the Curtain riſes by degrees to an aſcend- ing Ayr, ard a, Harbour is diſcern'd, (which was firſt diſcover'd ty Sir Francis Drake, and called by him Port-pheaſant) where two $/ ips are Moor d, and Sea-Carpenters are ereding a Pinnace, whilft others are felling Trees to build a Fort. The narrowneſs to the entrance of the Harbour may be obſeru'd, with Rocks on eitber (ides and out at Sea 4 8hip towing a Prize. And likewiſe on the top of a high Tree, a Mar- riner making his Ken. This Proſpe& is made through a Wood, differing from thoſe of European Climats, by repreſenting of Coco-Trees, Pines, &:d Palmitos, Ard on the Bougihs of other Trees ere ſcen Munkies, Apes, and Parrots. |
The IntroduQtion of the Entry is by a Mattial $4-abrd. M
The Play- Houſe to be Lett.
The Saraband being ended, Enter Drake Junior, and Boatſwain.
Drak. g NLimb, Boatſwain, climb! and from the height jun. \ Of that ſteep Rock inform thy ſight ! From yonder Point our Maſter call. [1] here attend our Admiral, [ Exit Boatſwain. The Miſt aſcends, and ſouth'rd-it grows clear ! Mcethinks at diſtance ſomewhat does appear, Which wakens us with hope. Boat: A Sail! a Sail! Drak.jun. *T1s Engliſh built, or elſe ngy (ight does fail. Boatſ:within. Oho! Oho! another Ship I ſpy, And, by their Courſe, both to this Harbour ply. Dak. jun. She lowrs her Main-ſail, the wind does riſe! Boatſ-within. She now bears in, and ſhe docs tow a Prize! -. Enter: Drake Senior. Drak. ſen, To Sea, to Sea! Man out the Boat! Drak. jun. [t has not Tyde enough to float. Drak. ſen. Stir, Mates! ſtir, ſtir! and bring more hands: Shove, ſhove! and roul her o're the Sands ! Lanch forth, and make your Ken! Both by her Rigging and her Mould She brings our Country-men3 . | And has a rich and heavy Hould. [ Exennt. Enter a Marriner, | 1 Mar. Ho, Mate! ho, ho! what canſt thou ſee From the top-Gallant of that Tree ? Mar.within. The Ship does Anchor caſt; And now her Boat does haſte To reach the Shore. I Afar. What ſeeſt thou more ? Mar.within. Enough to make me haſten down: For if my eyes prove true, The bowels of Terz Shall be ript up and be our own. The Lion Rowpe is landed here. 1 ar. I! run to meet him at the Peer. A Tun of yellow Gold, Conceal'd: within our Hold, For half my ſhare I ſcorn to take, When he is joyn'd with Dragon-Drake. [ Exit.
Two Marriners having met with another newly landed, dance to
| a Ruſtick Ayre.
The Dance being ended, Enter Drake Senior, Captain Rouſe, Drake Janjor, and Page.
Drak. ſen. Welcome to Land my brother of the Sea! From childhood reckt by winds and waves like me. Who never canit a danger dread,” Since {till in dang'rons Tempeſts bred, Yet ſtill art ſafe and calm within thy brealt, As Lovers who in ſhady Coverts reſt,
-®
The Play-hinſe to be Lett,
Thy fame about the world does make her flight, And flies as ſwiftly as the wings of light. Rouſ: My fame does Jay her Trumpet down; When yours does publiſh your renown. Drak. ſen. What 1s your Prize? Ronſs  *Ti1s fraught with Spies: A Carvel rigg'd at $7vell for this Coaſt, To fetch from hence © Intelligence ; But; meeting me, ſhe has her voyage loſt. | Drak. ſen. Brave friend, wilt thou now guided be By that bright Star which uſhers me? Rouſ. What man 1s that, Lovid Admiral, Who does not haſten at your call? He muſt be either deaf, or ever lame, Who follows not your loud and leading fame. Drak, ſen. My courſe muſt mw not be R Upon the open Sea - Our Country's foes we mult invade | Through Woods, and ſeek them in the ſhade And follow them where Phzbus never ſhines, Through depths as dark and winding as their Mines. Chorus of all. That which enlightens, and does lead The World, and all our Vid'ries breed, We in thoſe Caverns ſhall behold, In ſeeing Man's bright Miſtreſs, Gold. Drak. ſen. Boat all our Guns ! haſte, haſte aboard! Unlade! then let our Ships be Moor'd! To raiſe our Fort, ſome hew down Trees! Whilſt others rig our Pinnaces. Their watchful Guards let ev'ry Sentry keep, That, after labour, all may ſafely ſleep. . Some o're remoter grounds Walk, and relieve their Rounds : Whilſt ſome ſecure each Poſt On out-lets of the Coaſt. That, .after wandring long to trace Wild Rivers, we may find this place : For our imbarkment free, To wander more at Sea.
Drak jun. The jealous 8paniards lohg have underſtood The danger of this Harbour's neighbourhood.
'Tis therefore fit - That thou ſhould(ſt Ieave behind, To govern it, A great experienc'd mind. Drak. ſen. IT know it 1s of high import.
My ſecond thoughts conclude, thou Roxſe ſhalt 1tay,
To finiſh and ſecure the Fort ; Whilſt we to Yerta-Cruz enforce our way. Chorus of all. We. muſt the Main forbear, And now a Coaſlting go,  Thenup with Rivers (teer, To watch how _— frow. 2
»* -
The Play-Heuſe to be Lett:
But if landing we pals Where Recoes through Foords are long wading. | Then wein pitty, alaſs, Their Mules muſt eaſe of their lading. [ Exennt 0neg.
*
The Second ENTRY.
A Symphony vatiouſly hamour'd prepares the change of the $ceme.
——
The SCENE #s chang d.
In which is diſcern'd a Rockie Conntry of the Symerans, who were a Mooriſh People, brought formerly to Peru by the Spaniards, as their Slaves, to die in Mines; and having lately revolted from them, did live under the government of a Kingggf their own Eledlion. A Sea is diſtover'd, and Ships at diſtance, with Boats rowing to the ſhore, and Symerons z/porr the Rocks. | 3
The ProſpeT having continu d a while, this Song is ſung by a Steers- man in the foreoitm Boat, and the Chorus by Marriners rowing in it.
I
Steers- Loof! and aloof! and ſteady. I ſteer ! we A 'Tis a Boat to our wiſh, And ſhe {lides like a Fiſh, When chearily ſtem'd, and when you row clear. She now has her trim : Away let her ſwim. Mackrels are ſwiſt in the ſhine of the Moon ; And Herrizgs in Gales when they wind us, - But, timeing our Oars, fo ſmeothly we run, That we leave them in ſhoals behind us. Chorus. Then cry. One and all ! Amain, for Whitehall | The Dzegos we'll board to rummidge their Hold; And drawing our Steel, they muſt draw out their Gold.
2,
Sfeers- Our Maſter and's Mate, with Bacon and Peale, man. In Cabins keep aboard ; | Each as warm asa Lord: No Queen, lying 1n, lies more at her eaſe. Whilſt we lie in wait For Reals of Eight, And for ſome Gold Quoits, which fortune muſt ſend: But, alas, how their ears will tingle, When finding, though'ſtill like He&ors we ſpend, Yet ſtill all our pockets ſhall jingle. Chorus. Then cry, One and all! Amain, &Cc. |
Steer 5-22407.
The Play-houſe to be Lett. |
-# Steers- But oh how the Purſer ſhortly will wonder, man. When he @ms in his Book
All the wealth we have took, And finds that we'll give him none of the Plunder : He means to abate - The Tyth for the State : Then for our Owners ſome part he'll diſcount : But his fingers are pitcht together 3 Where ſo much will ſtick, that little will. mount. When he reckons the fhares of either. Chorus. Then cry, One and all!
Amain, &c. BY. Steers- At fight of our Gold, the Boatſwair will briſtle, man. But not finding his part,
He will break his proud heart, And hn himſelf ſtrait 1th' chain of his Whiſtle. Abaft and afore! Make way to the ſhore ! Softly as Fiſhes which ſlip through the ſtream, That we may catch their Sentries napping. Poor little Dzegos, they now little dream Of us the brave Warriors of Wappine. Chorus. © Then cry, One and all! Amain, &c,
This Song being ſung , Enter the King of the Symerons, Drake Sexjor, Pedro, and Page.
f
King. Great Wand'rer of the Sea, Thy walks ſtill pathleſs be. The Races thou doſt run, Are known but to the Sun. And as the walk above, Where he does yearly move, We only gueſs, though him we know, By great effects below. . $o, though thy courſes traceleſs are, As if conducted by a wandring Star, Yet by thy deeds all Climes acknowledge thee 3 And thou art known and felt as much as he. Drak. ſen. So narrow 1s my merit wrought, That when ſuch breadth you thus allow my fame, I ſtand corrected and am taught To hide my ſtory, and to ſhew my ſhame. King. As tireleſs as thy body 1s thy mind: No adverſe current can thy progreſs ſtop. 'Thy forward courage leaves all doubts behind. And when thy Anchor's loſt, thou keep'ſt thy Hops. Welcom ! and in my Land be free, And pow 'rful as thou art at Sea.
Drak, ſer;
3% :
Fd A
92 5 "The Play-bouſe to 'be Lett.
rr innnnnnth nn nn i
\ Drak. ſen. Monarch of much ! and ſtill deſerving more Than I have coaſted on the Weſtern ſhore !- Slave to my Queen! to whom thy vertue ſhows, How low thon canſt to vertue bez 17, And, ſince declar'd a Foe to all her Foes, Thou mak'ſt them lower bow to thee. King. Inſtruct me how my Sywerons and [ May help thee to afilict the Enemy. Dr.k. ſen. Aﬀord me Guides to lead my bold Victorious Sea-men' to their Gold: For nothing can afflict them more, Than to deprive them of that ſtore With which from hence they furnifht are ' T*aftiit the peaceful world with war. King. Here from, my boſom Pedro take, And him 0 chief ConduQtor make. Who once was. an unhappy ſlave to themz  - _But now is free by my deſerv'd eſteem. | He 1s as watchful as the Eye - Of Age ſtill wak'd with jealoufe 3 And like experienc'd Lovers wiſcly- true Who after long ſuſpicion find, They had no cauſe to be unkind, And then with ſecond vows their loves renew. Drak. ſer. He is, ſince fo deſervingly expreſt, _ Remoy'd but from thy boſom to my breaſt. King. All other ayds requir'd to thy delign, Chuſe and receive, for ail my ſtrengths are thine. [ Exennt.
Enter Four Symerons, who dance a Moriſco for joy of the arrival of Sir Francis Drake, and depart. Then this Song is ſang by a Chorus
of Marriners within.
Whilſt Merchants cry out, ſach ſport will undo 'em: And the Maſtey aloud bids, Lee the Helm Lee!
But we now ſhall fear nor the Rocks nor the Sand,
Whilſt calmly we follow our Plunder at Land, When others in ſtorms ſeek Prizes at Sea.
HMarriners within.
Chorus of ; Winds now may whiſtle, and waves may dance to 'em,
The Third ENTRY.
The change of the Scene is prepar'd by a Symphony, conſiſting of 4 Martial Ayr, which having continu'd a while, the 8cene changes, and repeſents a Peruvian Town , pleaſantly ſcituated, with Palmeto-Tree-, Guavas, and Cypreſles, growing about it, whilſt Engliſh Land-Sonl- diers and Sea-men ſeem to be drawn up towards the Weſt end; whilit the Peruvians are ſeaſting their Gueſts, and Two of their Boys bearing Fruit towards the Strangers. | |
Thi
PER, u5" 2 AE ht 7  $-LY
SO nn O77 EE TIE
Mr ——
This 0bje# having continu'd a while , Enter Drake Senjor, Drake Junior, Pedro, Page. b”
Drak. Arch! March! wheel to the right hand till, ſen. To ſhun looſe footing on that Hill.
| From thy Meridian run,
.._ O thou 1nflaming Sun! The Ayr above us elſe to fire will turn, And all this Sand beneath like Cynders burn. Now give the word ! | Drak. jun. Stand! Within. 1. Stand. 2. Stand. 3. Stand. | Drak. ſen. All firm and ſudden to command ! Halt for our Reer a while, and them Welt from that Wood draw up our Men. Stand to your Arms till we ſend out Qur truſty $ymerors to ſcout. Pedro. Scouts I have choſen, who can trace All the Retreats, which in the chace | The hunted ſeek all ſhades to which they run, When ſtrength leaves them, and they the Hunters ſhun.
Drak. ſen. Are thele Peruvians friends, or, by ſurprize,
Muſt we ſecure them as our enemies?
Pedro. Great Chief, they rev'rence thy renown, And thou mayſt quarter in their Town. -
Yet ſo advance with care,
In all the ſhapes of Warz |
That when the $pariards know How well they treat their Foe,
The entertainment may appear,
Not the effect of Love, but Fear.
Drak, jun. Their dwelling ſeems fo freſh and flouriſhing, As if it ſti]] the Nurs'ry were __ | Of all the ſeeds that furniſh out the Spring For ev'ry Clime, and all the year.
Drak. ſen. Here Nature to her Summer Court retires: Our Northern Region is the ſhade, Where ſhe grows cold, and looks decay'd, And ſeems to fit by artificial fires.
Drak. jun. Advance, Advance,
And in the Rear, To make-our number more appear, Let all our truſty $ywrons [pread Their Ranks, and be by Pedro led. | Chorus of all. All order with ſuch clemency preſerve,
That ſuch as to our pow'r ſubmit, May take delight to cheriſh it, - | And ſeem as free as thoſe whom they ſhall ſerve. [ Exennt. ©
Five Peruvians Enter , and dance to a Ruflick, Ayr, after which, this Song is ſung by a Peruvian, and the Chorus to it by his Conntry- wen, whilſt they dance again in a Ronnd. ;
Pery.
#
The Play-bouſe to br Lett
t.
Peri. With Boughs and with Branches trim up our Bowrs, And ſtrew them with Flowrs : , To receive ſuch a Gueſt As deſerves for a Feaſt | All that the Foreſt, or the Field, Or deeper Lakes and Rivers yield. Choris; Still round, and round, and round, Let us compaſs the ground. What man 1s he who feels | Any weight at his heels? | | Since our hearts are ſo ligit, that all weigh'd together, . Agree to a grain, andithey weigh not a feather.
Ks 2.
Peru. The Lord of the Sea is welcome to Land, And here ſhall command All our Wealth, and our Arms ; For his name more alarms. The $pariards, than Trumpets or Drums: Hark: how they cry, Drake comes, Drake comes! Chorus. Still round, and round, and round, Let &c. |
Z.
Per. Though to his Foes like thoſe winds he is rough, That meet in a huff: Yet that ſtorm quickly ends, When embrac'd by his friends: Then he is calm and gentle made, As Loves ſoft whiſpers in a ſhade. Still round, and round, and round, Let &c.
Chor HS,
nd
The Fourth ENTRY.
A Wild Ayr by way of Symphony, prepares the change of the Scene : which having continu'd a while, the Scene js chang'd; wherein is diſ- cern'd upon a Hill, a Wood, and in it a Tree, which was famons in thoſe times for extraordinary compaſi and height; on the top of which,
Pedro. (* formerly a Slave to the Spaniards, but now employ'd by the Mooriſh King to condnG& $:r Francis Drake towards Panamah) had promisd Sir Francis Drake to ſhew him both the North and the $outh Atlantick Seas, Engliſh Soldiers and Marriners are repoſing them- ſelves under it. 4t diſtance the Natives are diſcern'd in their hunting of Boars3 and at wearer view, two Peruvians are killing a Stagg.
This Objes baving remain'd a while,
-
_ Enter
The Tlay-houſe to be Lett.
Enter Drake Senior, Drake Tunior, Page.
Drake Boar \o fierce and large ſenior. A No Hunter e're did charge. ®* | Advance thy Spear, And turn him there. | Drak, jun. This laſt encounter he has bravely ſtood ; But now has loſt his courage with his blood. Drak. ſen. He foams, and ſtill his Tuſks does whet, As if he ſtill difdain'd retreat. Drak. jun. The wound you gave him makes him turn his head, Oo To ſeek the darker ſhades, where he was bred. ; Page: Follow, follow ! Drak. ſen. Stay my Victorious Boy | When a couragious Beaſt does bleed, Then learn how far you ſhould proceed To uſe advantage where you may deſtroy : To courage even of Beaſts ſome pity's due 3 And where reliſtance fails, ceaſe to purſue.
" Enter Pedro.
Pedro. Our men have firmly ſtood and ſwiftly run: The Game was plenteous and the Chace is done. Drak, jun. Pedro 1n ſev'ral forms has all That ev'ry where we merit call. Drak, ſen. Wary in War as Chiefs grown old; And yet 1n ſuddain dangers bold. Civil and real too in Courts ; Painful in bus'nefs and in ſports. Pedro. Behold that Tree which much ſuperiour grows To all that in this Wood | _ Have many Ages ſtood: | Beneath whoſe ſhade your Warriours may repoſe. Drak. jun. There let us ſtay And turn our Prey Into a Feaſt Till in the Weſt The Cypreſs curtain of the night is drawn. Then forward march as eariy as the dawn. Drak. ſez. Is this that moſt renown'd of Weſtern Trees On whole Main-top
| Thou gav'{t me hope To view the North and South Azlantick Seas ? Pedro. It is3 therefore with ſpeed
Thither, my Chief, proceed : And, when you climbing have attain'd the height, Report will grow authentick by your ſight. Drak, ſen. When from thoſe lofty branches I The ſouth Atlantzrh ſpy My vows ſhall higher fly, Till they with higheſt Heav'n prevail, That, as I ſee it, I may on it fail, Drak. jun. No Engliſh Keel hath yet that Ocean plow'd. Pedro. If Prophefie from me may be allow'd, Renowned
_
"%
The Play-houſe to be Tat. [-
WINE” E2
Renowned Drake, Heav'n does decree That happy enterprize to thee For thou of all the Britans art the firſt That boldly durſt This Weſtern World invade ; ' And as thou now art made The firſt to whom that Ocean will be ſhown, So to thy Ifle thou firſt ſhalt make it known. Chorus of all. This Propheſie will riſe To higher Enterpriſe. The Ereliſh Lion's walk ſhall reach as far As proſp'rous valour dares adventure War. As Winds can drive, or Waves can bear | Thoſe Ships which boldeſt Pilots ftear. | [ Exennt.
This Song is ſung by two Land Souldiers, and two Seamen.
Seame How comes it you Landmen, and we of the gea, Though oft mixt together yet ſeldom agree?
Landm. A Riddle, which we can find out no more Than you can why Seas conteſt with the ſhore.
Seam. We give a ſhrewd guels how our quarrels have grown For ſtill when at.Land we are joyntly delign'd To the dainty delight of ftorming a Town, You run to the Plunder, and leave us behind.
Landm. Alas, our dear Brothers! How can we forbear ? But aboord when you have us, where wonderful Gold Is ſhovell'd like Ballaſt, y*are even with us there: We fight on the Decks, whilſt you rummidge the Hold. . Sear. But now we ſhall march where the Dzegos (though loth To part with it civ'ly) may ſoon oblige both. | (gers,
Landm. They ſo much are ſcar'd from their wits with their dan- That now they want wit to be civil to ſtrangers.
Chorus Come let us joyn hands then, and nere part aſunder,
of all. But, like the true Sons of truſty old Mothers, Make equally haſte to a ſnap of the plunder, Then juſtly divide, and ſpend it like Brothers.
This Seng being ended, the two Land-Soutdiers and two Sea-men darce a Jigg, to intimate their ſuture amity.
The Fifth ENTRY.
This Entry is prepared by an Ayr and Corante; and then the Scene #s chang d, in which is diſcover'd the riſing of the Sun through 4 thick Wood, and Venta-Cruz at great difFance on the South fide. This
being diſcern'd a while,
Exter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Page, Souldier.
Drak. Ty Old Rouſe, doubting our ſafety 'by our ſtay; jun, Thinking his patience longer than our way 3
The Play-houſe to be Lett.
cHm—_— —
And having well ſecur'd our Port, Our Trenches digg'd, and rais'd our Fort, Is here arriv'd, reſolving ſtill to be A ſharer in your worſer deſtiny. He was conducted by a $ymeron ; And bows for what his raſher Love has done. Drak. ſen. I ſhall be very flow. * When I muſt backward go With puniſhment to overtake The errours which my friend did make. Tell him 1 know his fault is paſt; And now I cannot but go faſt, | When I fhall forward'move To meet approaching Love. [ Exit Souldier. The morn begins her glory in the Eaſt ; + And now the World prepares . To entertain new cares; : Though th'old ſaffic'd to hinder all our reſt. Drake jun. Benighted Seamen now their courſe reform Who, Coaſting, were miſguided by a ſtorm. Now Merchants to imported ſtowage haſte, Whilſt Plowmen drive from Cottages their Teems. The Poor in Cities riſe to toyl and faſte; And Lovers grieve to leave their pleaſant dreams. Drak. ſen. Be careful not to ler The CampsRevelie beat | To make our Warrtours riſe and move : But as Heav'ns Traveller above Unheard begins, and ſilently his way Does ſtill continue till he perfeCts day, $o all this progreſs muſt be calmly made. The winds, which till unſeen Have in their motion been, | Oft paſs without a whiſper through the ſhade. Drak, jun. Fach, dutious as your \lave, Does to your Orders grow 3  Andall, as in the Grave, are huſht and private now. Drak. ſen. E'te we begin to march, ſend out The $ymerons again to (cont: _ Let not our Wings be Jooſely ſpread : The Van I'll at fome diſtance lead. Thoſe who the Baggage bear Let Pedro (till relieve, and cloſse Secure their haltings in our Grols. You ſhall command the Rear.
"——_
Enter Rouſe.
Rouſe. Arm, Arm! make haſte, and bring me to my Chief! Drak, ſen. What great diſtreſs does haſten for relief! Rouſe. T come not now thy pardon to receive,
Becauſe my raſher love without thy leave
Durſt venture for a ſhare
Of thy miſhaps in War. | 1 N 2 1, al
_ =o . 4,86 on ee Þ 4c 43% me SANE E ED BO Te . ds 45 ML An Fes} (Ir tw IP I TOY ot OI I FI £3: 00 II es 6; OLLd TEST £55 PO TCO gf A OM BE oo ve a as 5 of ” } WW FRE OO UINE EN, 7% . PEg : As % 4
g98 The Play-houſe to be Lett.
Pe IR
Drak, ſen. What wildneſs more Than I have ſeen before In Deſerts openly expos'd Or Woods with ancient growth of ſhades inclos'd, Or Seas, when nought but mane 90g has appear'd, And only Thunder and the Winds were heard, Does now thy wond'ring looks poſleſs ? Drak: jun. What more than yet thou canſt expreſs? Rouſ: Drake, thy belov'd renown is loſt, OF which thy Nation us'd to boaſt : Since now where thou a ſword doſt wear, And many marks of pow'r doſt bear, The worlt of licenſe does beſt Laws invade: For Beauty 1s an abject captive made; Evqa whilſt thoſe flowry Ornaments are worn Which ſhould the Bridal dignity adorn. IF thus the crowd be ſuffer'd to deride The ſacred Rites and Honours of a Bride, Let ſavage War devour all civil Peace, Love fly from Courts to Camps, and Sexes ceaſe. Drak, ſen. Thy myltick meaning thou doſt leſs By words than by thy looks expreſs. Drak. jun. That we may better know Thy thoughts, make haſte to ſhow The object of our wonder, and thy fear. _. Konuſ: Turn your unhappy eyes, and (ſee it there.
The Scene is ſuddenly changed into the former proſpe& of the riſing of the Morning, and Venta Cruz 3 but about the Middle, it. is vary'd with the diſcov'ry of @ Beantiful Lady ty'd to a Tree, adorn'd with the Ornaments of 4 Bride, with her hair diſhevel'd, and complaining, with her hands towards Heaven : About her are likemiſe diſcern'd, the Sy- merons who took her priſoner.
Drak. ſen. What diſmal beauty does amaze my fight, Which from black ſorrow breaks like Morn from Night ?  _ And though it ſweeteſt beauty be Does ſeem more terrible to me Than all the ſudden and the various forms Which Death does wear in Battels and in ſtorms. Rouſ: A party of your Symerons (whole eyes Pierce through that darkneſs which does :1ight diſguiſe Whom weary toyls might ſleepy make, But that revenge keeps them awake) Did e're the early dawning riſe, And cloſe by Yenta-Cruz ſurpriſe A Bride and Bridegroom at+their Nuptial Feaſt, | To whom the Syw'rons now Much more than fury ſhows _ For they have all thoſe cruelties expreſt T hat Spaziſh pride could e're provoke from them Or Mooriſh Malice can reyenge eſteem. | Drak. ſen. Arm! Arm! the honour of my Nation turns
To ſhame, when an afflicted Beauty mourns. Though
The Play-houſe to be Lett.
Though here theſe cruel 8yxzerans exceed Our number, yet they are too few to bleed When Honour muſt revengeful be For this affront to Love and me. Drak. jun. Cur Forces of the Land, Brave Chief, let me command.  Drak.ſen. March on! whilſt with-my SeamenT advance, Let none, before the Dice are caſt, deſpair; Nor after they are thrown, diſlike the chance; For Honour throws at all, and (till plays fair. Rouſ. In beauties noble cauſe no Seamen doubr, If Poets may authentick be. For Sea-born Yerws fake let them march out : She leads them both at Land and Sea. Drak. ſen. Long yete're night I ſhall in fight Their ſtormy courage prove: Each Seaman hath his Mermaid too ; And by inſtinct mult love, Though he were never taught to woo. Exter Pedro. , Pedro. Stay ! ſtay! ſucceſsful Chief! my heart as low As the foundation where thou tread'(t does bow : | But 'tis not for my own offence; For if I ſhould offend "My King, in thee his friend, I would not with my ſelf. diſpence. Thy mercy (ſhall our pattern be, Behold th'afliicted Bride is free.
The Scene is ſuddenly chang'd again, where the Lady is vaniſht, and nothing appears but that Proſpe which was in the beginning of the Entry. | Sk |
She is as free and as unblemiſht too As if ſhe had a Pris'ner been to you. Drak. ſen. What are they who diſpguis'd in nights dark ſhade, Unlicens'd, from our Camp this ſally mad-? Strait to the ſtroke of Juſtice bring me thoſe ! Pedro. They thought their duties was to take their foes. Be merciful, and cenfure the offence 'To be but their miſtaken diligence. _ | Drak. jun. Suſpe not Pedro in this crime, who ſtill Has ſhewn-exaCt obedience to thy will. Pedro. And noble Chief, the cruelties which they Have often felt beneath the gpaniards ſway (Who midſt the triumphs of our Nuptial feaſts Have forc'd our Brides, and ſlaughter'd all our gueſts) May ſome excuſe even from your reaſon draw : Revenge does all the fetters break of Law. Drak, ſen. The future guidance and the care Of their demeanour in this war, Is ſtrictly, Pedro, left to thee: The gentle Sex muſt (till be free,
aj 4 > Gs Sy Fo tas a5 g bo > : F « . ' 4 + EAI NE bu in HE tes GE Area cube MEE ES, tt NS a Ee. A ba ads mop Pee Or ET , , OBPe”.. & 4 2 SES” POE Tis I Ne 5 ELSE Sa Eo ROE ron Geo de ion Wen tr OP COON ir Ro RT RE ATI : ; tat > # I
190 ED The Play- Houſe to be Lett.”
| — —
' No length of [{tudy'd torments ſhall ſuffice To puniſh all unmanly cruelties. March on! they may e're night redeem By vertuous Valour my elteem. [ Exeunt Drake ſenior, | Drake janior, Rouſe, and Page. Pedro. Ho! ho! the Pris'ners ſtraight unbind, | | And let the Bride all homage find 5 The Father and the Bridegroom hither bring.  Erre yet our Van ſhall far advance, Know Diegos you mult dance. Strike up, ſtrike up, in honour of my King.
Enter the Father of the Bride, and her Bridegroom ; the Bridegroom dancing with Caſtanietos,to expreſs the joy be receives for his liberty, whilſt the Father moves to his meaſures, denoting the fright he had receiv'd from the Symerons, when he was ſurpriz d at his nuptial Entertainment. | |
The Sixth ENTRY.
This Entry is prepar'd with a Martial Ayr , and preſently the Scene 3s chang'd; wherein is diſcover d the ProſpeF of a hilly Country, with the Town Panamah at a diſtance, and Recoes of Mules, in along train, loaden with Wedges of Silver and Ingots of Gold, and travelling in ſeveral Roads down a Mountain. There likewiſe may be diſcern'd theis Drivers and Guards. |
Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Page.
Drak. jun. HE KReco 1s not yet within our Ken. Drak, ſen. It will be {trait. Draw up our men, And in low whiſpers give our orders out. Drak. jun. Where's Pedro now ? Drak, ſen. Upon the brow Of that high Hill, I ſent him there to (cout. : Enter Rouſe. Rouſ. Chief, we are all into a Body drawn, And now an hour is waſted ſince the dawn, Drak. ſen. The time will yet ſuffice. We halted here To ſtay for our,tir'd Baggage in the Reer. Ronſ; If ought from new reſolves thou wilt command, | \ Speak, Chief, we now in expeCtation ſtand. Drak, ſer. If Engliſh courage could at all be rais'd, By being well perſwaded,. or much prais'd, Speech were of uſe : but Valour born, not bred * Cannot by art (ſince being ſo, It does as far as Nature go) Be higher lifted, or be farther led. | All I would fpeak, ſhould tell you, I deſpiſe That treaſure which TI now would make your Prize: Unworthy 'tis to be your chiefeſt aim. For this attempt is not for Gold, but Fame;
The Play-houfe to be Lett,
ION
| Which 1s not got when we the Reco git, But by ſubduing thoſe who reſcue it. | Enter a Souldier. Sol. Pedro deſcends the Hill, and does defire That from this open plain you would retire, And wheel behind that Wood a little ſpace.
Drak.ſen. Divide our Forces to ſecure the paſs. [ Exennt.
Enter Drake Junior, 4 Souldier, Rouſe, - ard a Mariner, the Souldier
and Mariner being brought to be plac'd as Sentries.
Drak, jun. This muſt your ſtation be; . Stand ſtedfaſt as that Tree! Ronſ. Bravely alive upon this ground,
Or greater elſe in death be found. [Exeurt Drak. juz. and Rouſe.
The Bells of the Mules are heard from within.
Mar. Mules! Mules! I hear their walking chime, Ting, Ting !—
They love ſad Tunes, how dolefully they ring ? $ol. This ſound ſeems ſingle, and from far does come. Would I were leading one rich Mule at home. Mar. Still one and all I cry. Sol. The reſt are paſſing by. Hark ! hark! this mournful toling does foretel Some D#egos death, it is his paſling-Bell
Enter Pedro, leading a Symeron to be plac'd as 4 Sentry.
Pedro. Here Sym ron, you muſt bold and watchful be, Two Foes reſiſt, but if oppreſt by three, Then ſtrait fall back to that next Sentry there: Or if in Groſs th' Enemy does appear,
Both to the third retirement make,
Till we th' Alarm, advancing, take.
Mer. Friend Pedro, friend! Is't one and all?
Pedro. Speak ſoftly, Sentry, doſt thou call?
Mar. How many golden Recoes did(t thou ſpy ?
Pedro. But two : in which I gueſs
By diſtant view no leſs
Than ninety loaden Mules are paſling by.
Sol. What number is their Guard who march before?
Pedro. Five hundred Foot, their Horſe may ſeem threeſcore. [ Exit.
$ol. Friend of the Sea, their number 1s not ſmall.
Mar. *Twill ſerve our turn, they crying one and all !
But brother of the Land, *+» We now muſt underſtand That Baſia is the Word.
Sol. Would thou wer't ſafe aboard.
Mar. Aſleep under Deck, and danc'd on a Billow, With two filver Wedges, each for my Pillow.
Enter Drake Senior, with his Sword drawn.
Drak, ſen, That Volly was well fir'd,
Our out-Guards are retir'd.
Draw alll our Sentries in!
The Skirmiſh does begin. | [ Exit. Claſhing of Arms is heard afar off.
Enter
EE ro i ii en HOOD es + CE bn Ne RET GC te Eres ee a orcs” "ISPS IN OO SS Ee 1 6 b LR "08 a. DE Se > FH: 4 nA S . ; aw, >
8K, »
The Play- Houſe to. be Lett:
—
Enter Drake Junior.
 Drak: jun, More Pikes! more Pikes! to reinforce That Squadron, and repulſe the Horlſe. = | Enter Rouſe.
Ronſe The Foe does make his firſt bold count'nance good. Our charge was bravely made, and well withſtood. | | | Enter Pedro.
Ronſ. Your 8ymrons, valiant Pedro, ſeem to reel.
Pedro. Suſpect your Rocks at Sea. They dopbut-wheel. Haſte! haſte! brave 89wrons, haſte to gain that bank,
And with your Arrows gall them in the flank. _ | [Claſhing of Arms within again. Exennt. Exter Drake Senjor, Page.
Drak. ſen. How warmly was this ſtrife Maintain'd *'twixt Death and Life, | | Till Blood had quench'd the flame of Valours fire?
Death ſeeming to advance in haſte,
Whilſt Life, though weary, yet ſtood faſt;
For Life is {ti]] unwilling to retire. My Land-men bravely fought, And high renown have got, For twice my'Sea-men they from death reliey'd. As oft my Sea-men have Preſery'd them from the grave, And did requite the reſcue they receiv'd. -- Enter Drake Junior, + Drak, jun. They fly! they fly! yet now they ſeem to face All thoſe who them purſue, And would the Fightrenew. [ Exter Rouſe & Ped.
Rouſ. They fly, they fly!
Drak, ſen. Away,” make good the Chaſe. [ Exennt 0mmes.
Chorus of all within. Follow, follow, follow !
Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Rouſe, Pedro, Page.
Pedro. The Mules are ſeis'd, and in our pow'r remain. Drak. ſen. Draw out new Guards, and range them in the Plain. Thoſe who hereafter on our Legend look, ng And value us by that which we have took, May over-reckon it, and ns miſprize. Our dang'rous _ through ſtorms and raging floods, And painful march through unfrequented Woods, W1ll make thoſe wings by which our fame ſhall riſe. Your glory, valiant Engliſh muſt be known, When men ſhall read how you did dare To fail ſo long, and march ſo far, | To tempt a (trength much greater than your own. Drak, jun. And now by making our Retreat, We ſhall new Wreaths and Statues get.
The Grand Chorus, firſt ſung by Drake ſex.
Chorus of all. Our Courſe let's to victorious Exeland ſteer !
' Where, when our Sails ſhall on the Coaſt appear, Thoſe
The Play-houſe to be Lett.
Thoſe who from Rocks and Steeples py Qur Streamers out, and Colours fly, Will cauſe the Bells to ring, Whilſt chearfully they ſing Our ſtory, which ſhall their Example be, And make Succeſſion cry, To Sea, to Sea. Exeunt omnes:
The Grand Dance begins, conſiſting of two Land-ſouldiers, two Sea- men, two Symerons, ard 4 Peruvian 3 intimating by their ſeveral in- terchange of ſalutations, their mutual deſires of amity.
The Fourth ACT. Exter Houſe-Keeper, Player.
Play. N2 W, Friend, we muſt ſtill ſuppoſe Our ſelves at Perx. | Hoxuſ:K. What's he? a humane Bird. Play. Afﬀeather'd Preiſt, who muſt ſpeak in the Dumb ſhow, and deſcribe the condition of America, Before the Spaniard {urpriz'd it,
The Cruelty of the SPANIAR DS in PERU.
The Argument of the whole deſign, conſiſting of ſix ENTRIES.
HE Defign is firſt to repreſent the happy condition of the People of Pers anciently, when their inclinations were go- vern'd by Nature; and then it makes ſome diſcov'ry of
their eſtabliſhment under the Twelve Tncas, and of the diflentions of the two Sons of the laſt I»ca, Then proceeds to the dilcov'ry of that new Weſtern World by the $paniard, which happen'd to be during the difſention of the two Royal Brethren, It likewiſe pro- ceeds to the $panzards Conquelt of that Tcan Empire, and then diſcovers the cruelty of the $paniards over the Indians, and over all Chriſtians (excepting thoſe of their own Nation) who landing in thoſe parts, came unhappily into their power. And towards the concluſion, it infers the Voyages of the Engl; thither, and the amity of the Natives towards them, under whoſe Enfigns (encourag'd by a Prophecy of their chief Prieſt) they hope to be made Victorious, and to be freed from the Yoke of the Spaniard.
The Firſt ENTRY.
HE Andience are entertain'd by Inſtrumental Muſick and « $ym-
| phony (being a wild Ayr ſutable to the Region) which having
preper'd the Scene, a Lantdchap of the Weſt-Indies 3x diſcern'd; di- 0
ſtinguiſht
The Play-houſe to be Lett.
ſtineniſht from other Regions by the parcht and bare tops of diitan Hills, by Sands ſhining on the ſhores of Rivers, and the Natives, in eather d Habits and Bonnets, carrying in Indian Baskets, Tngots of Gold, and Wedges of Silver. Some of the Natives being likewiſe diſ: cern'd in their natural ſports of Hunting and Fiſhing. This Profpe@ js made through a Wood, differing from thoſe of European Climats, by repreſenting of Coco-Trees, Pines, and Palmitos; and on the boughs of other Trees are ſeen Munkies, Apes, ard Parrots3 and at farther
diftance, Vallies of Sugar-Canes.
The $ymphony being ended: The chief Prieſt of Peru enters with his Attendant after him. The Prieſt is cloth'd in a garment of Feathers, longer than any of thoſe that are worn by other Natives, with a Bonnet whoſe ornament of Plumes does likewiſe give him a diſtin#ion from the reſt, and carries in his hand a guilded Verge. He likewiſe, becauſe the Peruvians were worſhippers of the Sun, carries the Figure of the Sun on his Bonnet and Breaſt.
E—
Thi Firſt Speech,
Spoken by. the Prieſt of the Sun :
taking 4 ſhort view of their condition, Lefore the Royal F amily of the Incas taught themeto live together in multitudes, under Laws, and
made them by Arms reduce many other Nations.
Hus freſh did Nature in our world appear, When firſt her Roſes did their leaves unfold : E're ſhe did uſe Art's Colours, and ere fear Had made her pale, or ſhe with cares lookt old. \ When various ſports did Man's lov'd freedom ſhow, And {till the free were willing to obey 3 Youth did to Age, and Sons to Parents bow. Parents and Age firſt taught the Laws of (way. | When yet we no juſt motive had to fear , Our bolder 7c4as would by Arms be rais'd; When, temp'rately, they ſti]} contented were, As great examples, to be only prais'd. | When none for being ſtrong did ſeek reward, Nor any for the ſpace of Empire ſtrove : When Valour courted Peace and never car'd For any recompence, but publique love. We fetter'd none, nor were by any bound; None follow'd Gold through Lab'rinths of the Mine: And that which we on ſtrands of Rivers fonnd, Did only on our Prieſts in Temple ſhine. Then with his Verge, each Priclt Could, like an Exorciſt, The coldeſt of his ſtudents warm, And thus provoke them with a Charm,
}
The Play-houſe to be Lett.
The Firſt Sopg.
In purſuance of the mauner of their Life, before their Incas brought theme to live in Cities, and to build Forts.
I,
Wok yet our world was new, | When not diſcover'd by the old;
E're begger'd flaves we grew, For having (ilver Hills, and ſtrands of Gold. Chorus. We danc'd and we ſung, And lookt ever young, And from reſtraints were free, As waves and winds at Sea,
2.
When wildly we did live, E're crafty Cities made us tame : When each his whole would give To all, and none peculiar right did claim,
Chorus. We danc'd and we ſung, CC. :
Zo
When none did riches wiſh,
And none were rich by busneſs made When all did Hunt or Fiſh,
And ſport was all our labour and our trade.
Chorus. We danc'd and we ſung, | &c.
4.
When Forts were not devis'd, Nor Cittadels did Towns devour : When lowly ſheds ſuffic'd, Becauſe we fear'd the weather more than pow'r. Chorus, We danc'd and we ſung, &C. |
o.
When Garments were not worn, - Nor ſhame did nakedneſs reſent : Nor Poverty bred ſcorn: When none could want, and all were innocent. | Chorus. We danc'd and we ſung, - + CC.
The Second ENTRY.
' A N Alman and Corante are play'd: after which a Trumpet-Ayr changes the Scene; where a Fleet is diſcern'd at diſtance, with WY a
———-—
The Play-houſe-to be Lets.
a proſpeF of the Sea and Indian Coaſt; the Ships bearing in their Flags the Spread-Eagle, to denete the Auſtrian Family; and on the right ſide are ſeen ſome Natives of Peru, pointing with amazement to the Fleet, ( as never having. hadithe view of Ships before) and in a monrning condition take their leaves of thir Wives and Children; be- cauſe of an ancient prophecy amongit them, which did ſignifie, That a Bearded People (thoſe of Peru having ever held it uncomely to wear Beards ) ſhould ſpring out of the gea, and conquer thew. The ob- je having remained a while, \the Prieſt of the-8un enters.
The Second Speech,
Deſcribing briefly the pleaſant lives of the Incas till this ſeaſon of ful- filling that prophecy, when a. Bearded People ſhould come from the Sea to defiroy them and two of theTacan Family ruine that Empire, which twelve of the Emperonrs had erefed.
N all the:ſoft delights of (leep and eaſe, Secure from War, in peacetu! Palaces, - Our Tzcas hiv'd : but now I fee their doom : Guided by winds, the Bearded People come! And that dire Prophecy muſt be fulfill'd, When two ſhall ruine what our twelve did build. 'Tis long ſince firſt the Sun's chief Prieſt foretold, That cruel men, Idolaters of Gold, Should paſs vaſt Seas to ſeek their Harbour here. Behold, in floating Caſtles they appear ! Mine eyes are ſtruck! Away, away With gentle Love's delicious ſway ! The Incas from their wives muſt fly ! And ours may ſoon believe We mourn to ſee them grieve, But ſhall rejoyce to ſee them dy. -For they by dying fafety gain: And when they quit, |  .. In Death's cold fit, Love's pleaſure they ſhall loſe Life's pain.
.
The Second: Song,
Intimating their ſorrow for their ſuture condition, (according to the Prophecy) under their new Maſters the Spaniards.
I,
O more, no more, { V Shall we drag to the ſhore Our Nets at the ebb of the Flood :; Nor after we lay The toyls for our Prey, Shall we meet to compals the'Wo9d. Nor with our Arrows e're delight, \._ +... To get:renowa ic. .. By taking down. : The ſoaring Eagle in his flight.
4
107
The Play-houſe to be Lett,
2,
Make haſte! make haſte! You delights that are paſt! And do not to our thoughts appear : Leſt vainly we boaſt Of joys we haveloſt, And grieve to reckon what we were. The ics glory now is gong! Dark grows that light, Which chear'd our ſight, Set is*their deity, the Sun.
Chorus. All creatures when they breed, May then with ſafety feed : All ſhall have times for liberty but we. We, who their Maſters were, Muſt now ſuch Maſters fear, As will no ſeaſon give us to be free.
This Song being ended, a doleful Ayr is heard, which prepares the entrance of two Trdians, in their feather'd habits of Per! they enter ſeverally from the oppoſite ſides of the Waod, and gazing on the face of the $cexe, fall into a Mimick Dance, in which they
expreſs the Argument of the Proſpect, by their admiration at the
ſight of the Ships, (which was to thoſe of Perz a new and wonder- full object) and their lamentation, at beholding their Country- men in deep affliction, and taking their leayes of their Wives and Children. |
The Thicd ENTRY.
Symphony , conſiſting of four tunes, prepares the change of the / q Scenes the profped conſiſting of a plain Indian Conntry, in which are diſtern'd at diſtance two Peruvian Armies marching, and ready to
give Battel, being led by the two Royal Brethren, Sons of the laſt Inca,
Arm'd with Bows, Glaves, and Spears, and wearing Buivers on their backs. The obje& having continu'd a while, the Prieſt of the Sun enters.
The Third Speech,
Titimating the unhappy event of the love of the laft Inca for he (con- trary to the cuſtom of all his Royal Anceſtors, who always marry'd their own Siſters ) had choſen to his ſecond Wife the beautiful Daughter of an inferiour Prince : his Prieſts and People having always believ'd 20 blood leſs diſtant than that of his Siſters, worthy to mingle with his own ſor propagation of the Emperial Race. This forvige Beauty ſo far prevail'd on his paſſion, that ſhe made him in his age aſſign 4 4 con(iderabte part of his Dominion to a younger $0n, his Anceſtors never having, during eleven Generations, divided their Empire.
This Youth, growing ambitious afier his Fathers death, invaded his | | elder
108 The Ply-Houſe to be Lett.
elder Brother at that unfortunate time when the Spaniards, purſuing their ſecond diſcovery of the Peruvian Coaſt, landed, and made a prodigious uſe of the diviſion of the two Brethren, by proving ſuc- ceſiful in giving their ajſeſtance to the unjuſt cauſe of the Tounger.
OW fatal did our 7nca's paſſion prove, Whilſt long made ſubje& to a foreign love ?
Poor Lovers, who from Empire's arts are free, By Nature may entire!y guided be, They may retire to ſhady Cattages, * And ſtudy there only themſelyes to pleaſe : For few conſider what they mean or do; But Nations are concern'd when Monarchs woo. And though our Inca by no Law was ty'd To love but one, yet could he not divide His publick Empire as his private bed. In-Thrones each is to whole Dominion bred, He blindly pris'd his. younger ſon's deſert, Dividing Empire as he did his heart, And fince his death, this made the younger dare T affront the elder's ſov'rainty with war. Ambition's monſtrous ſtomach does encreaſe By eating, and it fears to ſtarve, unleſs It ſtil] may feed, and all it ſees deyour. Ambition 1s not tir'd with toy], nor cloy'd with pow'r.
The Third Song,
' Which purſues the Argument of the Speech, and further illuſtrates the many miſeries, which the Civil War between the twa Royal Brethren
produc'd. I
Welve Incas have ſucceſlively Our ſpacious Empire ſway'd; Whoſe power whilſt we obey'd, We liv'd ſo happy and ſo free, As if we were not kept in aw By any Law, Which Martial Kings aloud proclaim. Soft conſcience, Nature's whiſp'ring Orator, Did-teach us what to love or to abhor ; | And all our puniſhment was ſhame.
2,
Our late great yzca fatally, Did by a ſecond Wife Eclipſe his ſhining life,
Whilſt reaſon did on love rely.
Thoſe Rays ſhe often turn'd and check't Which'with direct
The Play-bouſe to be Lett.
Full! beams ſhould have adorn'd his known And firſt authoris'd Race: But Kings who move Within a lowly ſphear of private love,
Are too domeſtick for a Throne,
Chorus. Now rigid War is come, and Peace is gone,
Fear governs us, and jealouſfte the Throne. Ambition hath our Chiefs poſleſt : All now are wak't, all are alarm'd : The weary know not where to reſt, Nor dare the harmleſs be unarm'd.
Afﬀeer this Song a Warlike Ayr is play'd, to which ſucceeds a Martial Dance, perform'd by four Peruvians, arm'd with Glaves, who enter ſeverally from oppoſite. ſides of the Wood, and'expreſs by their motions and geſtures the fury of that Civil War, which, by the ambition of the younger Brother, has engag'd their Country; and then depart in purſuit of each other.
— <> <—_—
The Fourth ENTRY.
Symphony , conſiſting of four tunes, prepares the change of the A Scene; which repreſents a great Peruvian Army, put to flight by
a ſmall Body of Spantards. This ebjed is produc'd in purſuance of the main Argument; for the Spaniards having firſt bred an amazement in the Natives, by the noiſe and fire of their Guns, and having afterwards ſubverted the elder Inca by aſſriting the younger, did in a ſhort time at- tain the Dominion over both by "ap po 45 The objed of this gcene hav- ing remain'd a while, the Prieſt of the Sun enters.
The Fourth Speech,
Intimating the amazement of the Peravians at the ſight of the Spam- ards iz Arms 3 the conſideration of the great diflance of the Region from whence they came + of the ill effets of Armour worn by a People whom they never had offended, and of the ſecurity of innocence:
Hat dark and diſtant Region bred \ y For War that bearded R ace, Whole ev'ry uncouth face We more than Death's cold viſſage dread? | They could not (till be guided by the Sun. Nor had they ev'ry night The Moon t'inform their ſight; How durſt they ſeek thoſe dangers which we ſhun? Sure they muſt more than mortal be, Thar did fo little care For life, or elſe they are Surer of future life than we. But how they reaſons laws in life fulfill We know not; yet we know, That ſcorn of life 1s low. Compar'd to the diſdain of liviog ill.
EE 110. AT 5 The Play- Houſe to be Lett.
And we may judge that all they do In life's whole ſcene is bad, Since they with Arms are clad Defenſive and Offenſive too. In Nature it is fear-that makes us arm And fear by guilt is bred : The guiltleſs nothing dread, Defence not-ſeeking, nor deſigning harm. [ Exit.
The Fourth Song,
Purſuing the Argument of the amazement and fear of the Natives, oc-  Caſion'd by the conſideration of the long Voyage of the Spaniards to invade them, |
I.
Hoſe foreign ſhapes ſo ſtrange appear, That wonderful they ſeem; And ſtrangeneſs breeds eſteem And wonder doth engender fear : And from our fear does adoration riſe : Elſe why do we encline To think them Pow'rs divine, And that we are ordain'd their ſacrifice? Chorus. 1. When we our Arrows draw, þc It is with dreadful awe: 2. Moving towards them whom we are loth to meer, 3. As if we marcht to face our deſtiny : 4. Not truſting to our Arrows but our feet, As if our bus'neſs were to fiy, to fly!
2,
All in We thought them more than human kind. ; Chorus. That durſt adventure life Os *'s Through the tempeſtuous ſtrife 1 Of Seas and ev'ry raging wind. Through Seas ſo wide, and for their depth fo fear'd, That we by leaps as ſoon * May reach th'aſcended Moon, | As gueſs through what vaſt dangers they have ſteer'd. Chorus. When we our Arrows draw, Cs
This Song being ended, a Saraband is play'd, whilſt two 8pan;- «rds enter from the oppoſite ſides of the Scene, exaGtly cloth'd and arm'd according to the cuſtom of their Nation: and to expreſs their triumph after the viftory over the Natives, they ſolemnly un- cloak and tinarm themſelyes to the Tune, and afterwards dance with Caſtanietos. ;
The
% FLW Wo” x w. md, < NY 7 Its ag 3 Sb Gale We EEE ng td ES Re. 1 Ka o 2 C "4? * *. Ps z . * Lv; [} A » , s P? ;
.. The Plaz-houſe to be Lite.
The Fifth ENTRY.
' A Doleful Pavin is play'd to prepare the change of the Scene, which A repreſents a dark Priſon at great diſtance 5 and farther to the view are diſcern'd Racks ,. and other Engines of torment, with which the Spaniards are tormenting the Natives and Engliſh Mariners, which way be ſuppos'd to be lately landed there to diſcover the Coat. Two Spaniards are likewiſe diſcover'd, ſitting in their Cloaks, and appear- ing more ſolemn 3 Ruſſs, with Rapiers and Daggers by their ſides 3 the one turning a Spit, whilſt the other irbaſting az Indian Prince , which is roſted at an artificial fire. This obje@ having vemain'd a while, the Prieſt of the Sun enters. |
 Fhe Fifth Speech.
The horrour of the Natives, bred by the obje& of the diverſity o no forments devird by the Spaniards. Wy of
Heſe ſtudy arts of yy ane, languiſhment, And ſtrength'ning thoſe for pains whom pain hath ſpent. They make the Cramp, by waters drill'd, to ceafe Men ready to expire, | | Baſte them with drops of fire, And then, they lay them on the Rack for eaſe.” | =
What Race 1s this, who for our puniſhment Pyetend that they in haſte from Heay'n were ſent, As juſt deſtroyers of Idolatry ? Yet will: they not permit
We ſhould our [dolls quit, Becauſe the Chriſtian Law makes Converts free.
Or if, to pleaſe their Prieſts, ſome Chief permits A few of us to be their Proſelytes; Yet all our freedom then is but deceit. They eaſe us from our Chains To make us take more pains, | Light'ning our legs to give our ſhoulders weight. 4
And other Chriſtian ſtrangers landing here,
Strait, to their jealous fight, as ſpies appear :
And thoſe, they ſo much worſe than Heathens deem, That they mult tortur'd dye. The world (till waſte muſt lye,
Or elſe a Priſon be to all but them.
The Fifth Song.
Purſuing the Argument of the 8peech, by a farther deteſiation of that cruelty , which the ambition of the Spaniards made them exerciſe
«,
7n Peru. |
P:-: IF
A LE ea winds BY. Vows LO tad Ca In” 2, "1 Eds $5) ns EN Darth. Fs ENRe, "RF . JT IG Bo g # . "ROE? EE 7> « »
F” oi
The Plag- houſe to be Lett.
I.
F Man from ſovreign reaſon does derive ' | Or'e Beaſts a high prerogative, Why does he fo himſelf behave, That Beafts'appear to be More rational than he! Who has deſerv'd to be their ſlave.
2.
How comes wijd cruelty in humane breaſts ? Proud Man more cruel is than Beaſts; When Beaſts by hunger are enrag'd, They no long pains deviſe For .dying enemies, | | But kill, and eat, and are aſlwag'd.
Ze
So much is Man refin'd in pony As not to make men quickly dye. He knows by death of pains are paſt. But as he hath the ſkill A thouſand ways to kill, So hath he more to make pains laſt. -
Chorus. When Beaſts each other chaſe and then devour, *Tis Natures Law, neceſlity, Which makes them hunt for food, -and not for pow'r : Men for Dominion, Art's chief vanity, . * Contrive to make men dyz | Whoſe blood through wantonnelſs they ſpill, Not having uſe of what they kill.
This Song being ended, a mournful Ayr is play'd, preparing the entrance of three Peryvians, limping in (ilfer fetters. They are driven into the Wood by an'infulting 8p4aniurd, with a Truncheon ; then enter again loaden with Indian baikets full of golden Ingors, and filver Wedges, and lying down” with the weight of their bur- thens, are raiſed by the blows of the Sparzard, and fall into a halt- ing dance, till the Spariard zeviying their wearinefs with his Trug-
cheon, drives them again into the Wogd.
.
j Lf
The Sixth ENTRY.
' \ Symphony prepares the liſt change of the Scene, and an Army is
diſtern'd at diſtance, couliſting-of Engliſh and-Peruvians the
Van ir leaps the Engliſh, -wbo are diftiveniſht by the Enſignes of Eng- th f
land, and their Red-Coats. The Reer is.bronght.up by the Peruvians, who are known by their feather'd \Habits, Glaves, and Spears. There zs likewiſe diſtern'd a Body of armed Spaniards, their. backs turn d,
and their Reer ſcatter d as if put to flight. Theſe imaginary Engliſh | Forces
The: Play-bouſe'to be Lett.”
L173
—_ ————————— my
Forces may ſeem improper, becauſe the Engliſh had made no diſcovery
of Peru, in the time of the Spaniards firſl invaſion theres; but yet in
Poetical repreſentations of this nature, it may paſi as a Viſion diſcern'd by the Prieſt of the Sun, before the matter was extant, in order 'to his Prophecy. This obje& having remain'd a while the Prieit of the Sun enters. | EF:
* The Sixth Speech,
Intimating their ff adoration of the Spaniards when they landed, the behaviour of the Spaniards towards them, and a Prophecy that they ſhall be reliev'd by the Engliſh.
TE on our knees theſe Spaniards did receive As Gods, when firſt they taught us to believe. They came from Heaven,” and us o're heights wonld lead, Higher than e're our ſinful fathers fled. Experience now (by whoſe true eyes, though ſlow, We find at laſt, what oft too late we know) Has all their cous'ning miracles diſcern'd : 'Tis ſhe that makes unletter'd mankind learn'd, She has unmaſk't theſe $pax;ſo dark Divines : _ © "Perhaps they upward go, 7
- -» But haſten us below, ; |
Where we, through diſmal depths, muſt dig in Mines.
When firſt the valiant Ezglifs landed here, Qur' reaſon then no more was rul'd by fear : They treight the 8pariards Riddle did unfold, Whoſe Heav'n in caverns lies of others Gold. Our griefs are paſt, and we ſhall ceaſe to mourn, For thoſe whom the inſulting Spaniards ſcorn, And ſlaves eſteem -Fhe Engliſh ſoon ſhall free; chin Whilſt we the $pariards ſee Digging for them, oe The Prieſt being gone, a wild Ayr isplay'd, (differing from that in the Firſt Entryy which-prepares the comming in of a Spaniard out of the Wood, loaden with Ingots of Gold, and Wedges of Sil- ver. He makes his footing to the tune of the Inſtruments;3 and af- ter a while he diſcovers a wearineſs and. inclination.to; ſleep, to
which purpoſe he lies down, with his baſker-for his pillow. Two:
Apes come in from oppoſite ſides of the. Waod, and dance to the Ayr. Aﬀeer a while, a great Baboon enters, and joyns with them in the dance. They wake the: 8paniard,” and end the Antique
AM
Meaſures with driving him into the Woad...-
_ The Sixth Song, | 219113 #28 i 573301 86 AHN Purſuing the Argument of that Prophecy , which foretells the ſubverſion of the Spaniards by the Engliſh. A"
E ſhall no longer fear The 8panzſh Eagle darkly hov'ring here; p P 2 | For
Loma feel a bed 2 OSEIRSE , ie MSe's 5 et” _ F ;Þ OSS o tt, Me KS RE ds. bao DS ck 1h dr of EN BIG Mb "Wn. Pr YNDRES a Te tot WE 5 WET r bs Se Mg, Pr Ian. EY Ee 2" WIS OD IF y $a EW "EE ON Rl e J s Ns» 3 s HY "5 2 x Jv, #7 . X 4 » _ "> X ENS oy V WY Ds - 7 , .. 4 4 s
114 The Play-bouſe to be Lett. For though from fartheſt Climes he hither fled, And ſpatiouſly his wings has ſpread :
Yet th' Emgh;ſþ Lyon now Does ſtill viftorious grow, And does delight To make his walks as far As th'other e're did dare | To make his flight. Chorus. 1 High, 2 high, 3 and high 4 Our Arrows fhall flic, And reach the winged for our prey. Our Nets we'll caſt, and Sprindges lay : The Ayr, the River, and the Wood, . Shall yield us ſport and change of food. All in Chorus. Aﬀter all our diſaſters | The'proud 8pariards our Maſters, When we extoll our liberty by feaſts, At Table ſhall ſerve, | Cr elſe they ſhall ſtarvez Whilſt th' E-gliſo*ſhall fit and rule as our gueſts.
This Song being ended, an Ayr confiſting of three Tunes, pre- pares the grand Dance, three 1:dians entring firſt, afterwards to them three Engliſh Souldiers, diſtinguiſht by their Ked-Coats, and to them a Spaniard, who mingling in the meaſures with the reſt, does in his geſtures expreſs pride and ſullenneſs towards the Indi- ans, and pays a lowly homage to'the: Exgliſh, who often ſalute him with their het, which falutation he returns with a more lowly gra- "ys whilſt the Engl and the Indians, as they encounter, colute
| and ſhake hands, in ſign of their future amity.
The Fifth ACT.
Entey Houſe-Keeper, and Player.
Play. TO W we muſt have one voyage more from Fer to Alexandriz (which in good troth,
Is but a ſtep to ſwift imagination) | And then we may leep in'our empty Tnn Until next Term.
Houſ.K We have no Scene of Alexandria.
Play. A Canopy of State to ſhew the Majeſty Of thoſe who are preſented will ſerve turn.
Houſ:K. Have w'ee quoth the blind Harper, 7 When he wiſht to be as little ſeen as he ſaw others.
Draw ho! + :
The Play-houfe to be Lett.
| "4
' The Scene of the Canopy where Czſar, Anthonius, Lepidus, Ptolom y, _ and Cleopatra appear, and their ſeperal trains on each (ide of them.
Play. This Viſion ſhould have been enabled too By a ſhort ſpeech t'acquaint the doubtful SpeCtators With Ceſar, Antonius, and Lepidus,
Ptolomy, Cleopatra, and their train.
Houſ:K. That w'are to make this a kin to the dumb ſhow. ---
Enter the Gypſies, Men and Women.
Theſe are the Gypſies with which Cleopatra Entertain'd Ceſar, as blind Authors ſay.
The Gypſies dance.
The Dance being ended, the Gypſies depart, and the Scene changes
into a Parrad or Court du Guard.
Play. But where are now our Bullies the Burleſquers, That ſhow. the wrong fide of the Hero's outward ?
Enter two Ev'nuchs.
Oh, here comes two of Ptolemies Ev muchs.
Enter Nimphidius, and azother Ev'nuch.
Ev'n. You of your news Nimphidins are fo dainty |! Nzmp. If I had news, .ic troth I would acquaint ye. Ev'r. Then I have ſome, but oh, 'tis doleful matter ! Nip. Hab nab's the word! All caſtes are not Cinque quater, Ev n. Rome now of Eg ypt quickly will beguil us,
Tyber is come to play her pranks in Nilus.
' Nimp. If Tyber brings her plund'ring baſe Burgonions,
Farewell on Nzlzs Banks our Leeks and Onions. Ev'n. A cruel wight 3 whole name is Mark Anthony,
(So hard of heart that it is held all bony)
Is here arriv'd for love of our black Gypfp,
On Cleopatra he has caſt a Sheeps-eye:
And Ceſar too with many a ſtout Terpawling
Landed with him and comes a Catterwawling. | Nimp. How ſhe will ſimper, at the ſight of Ceſar?
And oh, how truſty Toxy means to teaſe her ? 4 :
Ev'n, Ah fickle fortune! who would e're have dreamt this, Rome's roaring Boys will ſwagger now at Memphis.
Nip. Behold they come who quickly can iniorm us.
Ev'n. Nimphidins, mum, be ſilent as a Dormoulſe.
Enter Czſar, Mark-Anthony, Cleopatra, Ptolomy, Anthonio
leading Cleopatra.
Nimp. There Tony 1s, our Cleopatra leading 3 _ Her eyes look blew 3 pray Heav'n ſhe be not breeding?
Ew 2,
—
The Play-Houſe to be Lett.
Evy'n, There's Ceſar too, and Ptolomy behind him, Prond Princock-Czſar hardly ſeems to mind him. +. . *  LExennt Nimph, Ev'nuch. Anth. Which is your Brother dear? I prethee ſhew me ? Cry mercy, Sir, are you the King. Ptolomy? : Piol. TI am as ſurely 'he (moſt mighty Toy) As ſhe is my ſweet Siſter, and your bony. - GET Anth. Great Ceſar come, ſhake filts with/ſtripling Royal, Though Pompey was betray'd, this Imp was loyal. . Ceſar. Know tender S$prixgal (Ill not chide but frump ye) You play'd at Trap, when Traps were lay'd for Pompey. With finger in eye his Wife had not wept here | If ſtead of Trapſtick you then had us'd Scepter. Ptol. When Fortune frumpiſh is, who e're withſtood her? Ceſar, this bus'neſs makes too great a pudder : I would not ſlander Popes now he dead 153 Yet let me tell, what by my people faid is, You'll ſay the pratling people falſly charge'men; But all report that Pozzpey's Barge and Bargemen Had plunder'd Nilzs banks till there was ſcarce one Turky or Pigg left for the tyth of Parfonz _ Of which even Pompey muncht his ſhare in Cabin, Where, from the ſhore, he becken'd many. a drab in : Under the Koſe I ſpeak't, he was Dragon, When he brown Damſel got, with ſcarce a rag on; 4 0 And came not here for reſcue, but to rob us; Yet we at laſt bob'd him who meant to bob us. Ceſar. Youth, you are to young to lit in the Sadle, And crow in a Throne, go cry in a Cradle. Tutor ſhould teach you to ſpeak-well of dead men, Go learn to rob Orchard, not to behead men. With blood of Rowan, your Ev'nuch does grow fat ; Such knaves wax crue), having loſt --- you know what. He rules the roſte, but fome body go call him! h I ſwear by Hefor Hannch, T mean to mall him ! Cleo. Is this your Ceſar? tell me deareſt Bunting? *- I'faiks I muſt have leave to ſpeak of one thing. Can he that's Cock of Fome be ſo miſtaken As thus to threaten poor Fg yptiar Capon ? I ſcorn, though but a Female and no Rowan, To meddle with an Ev'nuch who is n6 man. When firſt we ſaw you failing to our Haver,. We little thought to find'your cock a Craver- Anth. Peace Lamb, and be like Lamb-kine meek, and humble, Ceſar like Wolf, will bite when he does grumble. Where place does not itch, I feldom do'rub ye, Nay, you are ſtrait blub'ring if I but ſhub ye. If Ceſar's blood be up, Blade will not ſpare ye, Fe yþt will then be in a fine quandarie. Cleo. I'll not be ſcar'd,” though he look ne'r ſo hideous, He may go ſnick-up if he hates Nymphidions. Anth. His ſtomach bears not long. the wrongs he {wallows, But, if you'll not be counſell'd, take what follows.
He'll
*
©» The Pliyyrhonſe to be Len,
117
He'll ſtrait be all for plunder and for forage. #4 Cleo. Ceſar may ſpare his breath to cool his porrjdge 3 He'll be the worſe, the more- one him beſeeches. -
Anth. Chuck, I have done, I ſee you'll wear the Breeches.
Ceſar. What have heard? ſhall it be ſaid in Hiſt ries, That Marcus Tony ſquabl'd with his Miſtreſs. If Love be out of Joynt, [11 be the Joyner, Say ſon of Scepter, ſpeak thau Monarch-Minor !
- Shall Lovers: fall to ſcratch like midnight Puſles. -
Let's turn their frowns and wrath to leers and buſſes. Ptol. Moſt pujſant Plund'rer ! know the ſhort and long is,
That all who know thee, find thy breath fo ſtrong is,
As meerly with a word it quells the mighty, And ſtuns them paſt the cure of Aqua-vite. Cleo. Eg ypt's no fool for Rowe to put her tricks on,
And you ſhall find that I can be a Vixon.
Muſt warbling Ev'zuch dye, who ne'r was ſick long And fing ſhort Pſalm in Rope, who taughs me prick-ſong ?
Ptol. Shall he who can read, and love leſſons taught her, -
Be now deny'd Book, and dye for Man-ſlaughter ?
Anth. Ceſar, things are not as th' World now ſuppoſes ; The caſe ſeems plain as on your Face your Noſe is. Great Pompey near ſhore, for Poultry was gapin Did count without Hoſt, and fo was tane nappi
Cleo. What Ev much has done, he did for your ſake then:
As Pompey did brew, he made him to bake then.
Ceſar. Let Memphion Miſtreſs look but blithe and bonny,
On Ceſar ſmile, as ſhe does ſmerk on Then Ev'zmch plump ſhall live, and grow ſtill thicker,
| Like Hoſteſs fat, wha fits in chair of Wicker.
Cleo. Ceſar, Gramercy, you now ſhew your breeding, Invite him ſweet heart, I pray to our Wedding, I thought my ſelf truly quite under hatches. L But now call Maid to bring her Queen new patches.
\ Bring Kirchief lac'd 2: I'll no more be a Mourner !
And Ceſar, you ſhall find—— a friend in corner. Anth, Great ton of ſlaughter leers? he'd fain be at her, I'll daſh his chops, 1f mouth begin to. water.
Hat black and broad, long Cypreſi'down behind it, Gown ſhort and Jooſe, and her hair under Pinner,
(As if locks on Cheek, were token of Sinner)
Where Bodkin is ſtuck in faſhion ſo odly
As though out of zeal, Dame layd the French made by. 'Maſs now I think on't, *tis Powpey's rich widow.
Anth, Of mumping Minx, would we were fairly rid hoe!
Cleo. Lord, how'ſhe looks? ſhe could cut us in Collops : Shall Tony, and I, fear ev'ry fat Trollops?
Like hard hearted heart ſhe over us hovers, As Kite watches Chickens, ſhe watches Lovers.
Corn. What have, caught ye! how all of ye ſtate on't, I'faith I'll to Rowe, 'and their do your errant : | By Senate y'are ſent to follow your calling, They think you are now their Enemies mauling :
[ Enter Cornelie. Ceſar.Sly ſcowling look (though men of Aars ne'r mind it)
PR OO .. ab ba. aide ab oe et Do NL EN 7 EIT Fo » as : -. . - «
a tt tes a ts © LE _ WEE 09 7 WE"; 8 ES Ks 2 by %  -?
178 The Plg-Houſe to be Lot:
Man, Woman, and Child, you chief ſhould be killing, But 'ſtead of bgmbaſtiog _ are a billing With Queen who ſhould be her Pariſhes pattern, Good Houſewife in Houſe not ſauntring young ſlatern.
, Cleo. Bodikins! pray why a gog Miſtreſs Pompey? As high as you are a Joan may out-jump ye,
Be an example before y'are a Tutreſs! .
You want a Tarquin to make you a Lucreſs,
Corn. Marry come up, Goodman Ptolomey's daughter,
_ Faith in your Wine, I perhaps, may put Water; For all your new Gown, y are but a black Gypſez,
Sure Tony and you have drunk till y'are tipley.
Nay take the whole Meſs, y have yet but a ſpoonful, I'll bate not an Ace, as Widow of Conſal.. © Ag For though you now perk it, as daughter of King,
Birlady, I'll give you as good as you bring : I know your back's broad enough, ['ll put you to't. Cleo. Well, Goflip, I know too the length of your foot. Ceſar. Hey for Cornelia! ſhe's ſti]l for old Rowe. Corn. Ceſar, yo'd cog now, but ſome wiſer than ſome, Your crony and you in Fe ypt now flant it, Spending like Royſters, whilſt honeſt ment want it. Leave off your hedring with Heirs whilſt you fool 'um, And drinking Beer-glatles ſaper naculum ; Drowning of. ſorrow like negligent Debters, Sending to Provinces ſhort begging Letters, Which being deny'd, then with Armies you goe And take what you'll pay back to morrow to mow. Ceſar. Your Tipper's up, but Bilbo Wights ne'r mind ye, Turn Buckle of Girdle, wear it behind ye. - Antb. Let Goflips ſhake hands, and Ceſar appoint her Some Blade that has houſe to make her a Joyature. Widow, be friends, make no more ſuch a hot coyl; We'll find out rich Huſband to make the Pot boy]. Cleo. If the wound be few'd up, Ill not unrip it, Fl keep my tongue in, if ſhe'll pin down Typpet. | Ceſar. Proud Pompey (whom now we never ſhall lack more) Came in at a Gate, ſneakt out at a Back-dore. Great was the mortal, and long cock-a-hoop too, But down he did fall, whom all men did ſtoop too. Yet Fortune has done, bnt what does become her In Winter w'are Hay, and Graſs in the Summer. Corr. In troth it 1s true! we are of that ſort all ! Then farewell ſweet Pompey ſince thou wert mortal. Cleo. Well ſaid, Cornelia, I ſee you are heart whole,
Hang up all care.” which from Body would'part Soul !
+ Where are the Fidlers? what Tune ſhall we fix on ?
Faith, let's have the round of merry Mall Dixon.
Ceſar. Call in the Fidlers but heark ye friend Tony,
Whilſt now I think on't, have you any money ?
For though in'War 1 did bear all before me,
Caſh ſtays behind, and I'm fain to cry ſcore me !
Anth. Ceſar, my plunder (l ſpeak it with ſorrow.) Is ſquander'd with Girles, and I'm forc't to borrow,
b Wn rt ok Ft ENS OR. - Ge M7 16.08 PEG ate Bo TY *; ae ffheak 5 .f $0 4 2 9 NL
0 z; Dogs i Ss ps 48, a Fr ER Mr (3; 4 : * ; ng LE Eo Tj OS bh : Fo As oooghe WS : WR . , G * 1 "4. 2 wo bn > ® . *#, 7 ; eee ORE OE 25x ge. + . - # = 8 By - Rt p - OF, 4 o * b _ :
_—_
* ” en BS” # A -
*, The Playhouſe to be Lett.
Je
Yet let 'em play us but princunt and prancum, - | * And we'll pay at laſt, or els we'll thank 'umi. ' OE ge. The Dance. | e\ ="
' Ceſar. Let's to the Ale-houſe go, where Tapſters know me, - Fat Hoſteſs there wil truſt; lead King Ptolomey- | Fidlers will thither come, and never grumble; | In Play-houſe they are proud, in Ale-houſe humble. Goflips ſhall tatle there, while tongues will wag on, | And tomy Gypſies health I'll drink a Flaggon. ' CExenttt.
Houſ: K. What is all done? _ + ©,
Play. I, and we are undong, ſome body has let Our neighbours in--- '{]Iight the Houſe 1s e'en full, Stop 'em! they're like to hear, if they will ſtay An Epilogue, ince they have ſeen a Play. _ - [ Exennt omnet:
*
I .
EPILOGUE.
Ince you at Land no more can burry'd be, g The ſhifted Scene ſhould turn us now to Sea © Where our ſmall Bark does firike, where we d ſpy Towre the Admiral, with your Main-Top high. Our Pilot-Poet ſhould his Laurel vayl, (Which is his Flag) as low as we our Sayl.
To ſhew you things yet newer, we did mean To repreſent a Mermaid in that Scene; ,..
Not proudly combing, with « Comb of Golf,
Her long wet hair, till the vain wretch takes cold,
(For ſo ſhe's painted by each bungling Rogue )
But in her hand an humble Epilogue ;
Which thee by ſigns (for Mermayds ſeldom ſpeak) SR Should recommend to Criticks on the Deck : .
And by a court fie, ſhould a Plaudit beg ;—
Note, female fiſhes never make a leg.
But that's an obſervation by the by.
And now, methinks, T hear ſome ask me why
That obſervation's made ? Our Author ſays
'Tis juſt like thoſe which Criticks make at Plays.
He ſffed he wiſht for our ſakes, not his own, cM (Tet that's a charity but rarely known ) | Sweh Audiences as learning doe forbear
I mean, who never ſlrive to ſhew it here.
This Landiſchap of the Sea (but by the way ) That's an expreſſion which might hurt our Play, If the ſeverer Criticks were in Town 3 This Proſpe@ of the Sea, cannot be ſhown : Thepefore be pleas d to think, that you are all Behind the Row, which mee ſtile Portugal. The title at our dores was that which drew Tox hither by the charm of being new.
Toul ſpoil the jeſt, unleſs the Play ſucceeds For then we may, een let our Houſe indeed.
FINIS. Q.
.T HE
