Requested Title: TIlE WITS
Authors: Sir William Davenant
Matched Alias: The Wits
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_two-excellent-plays-_davenant-sir-william_1665
Source Title: Two excellent plays: ... 1665
Source Author: Davenant, Sir William.
Source Date: 1665
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/two_excellent_plays_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from Internet Archive searchtext for Davenant's The Wits, kept distinct from Chamberlayne's Wits led by the nose.

---
The Wits:
6 #&? lhe y: COMEDIE:;
Preſented at = Private Houſe
ZBlack fryers,
By His Majeſties Servants.
- w Kr b@2 The eAVTHOR, #7 Sir WilLlaMDaveNaNT,Kt. |
LONDON, ” S Printed for Gabriel Bedel, and = Collins, and ate ©
to be ſold at their Shop at the Middle Terms ple-gate in Fleetltreet, 1 6'6 5.
SOOU: Fe 7 SSICIATE T8660 To the Chiefly Belov'd of all
that are . Ingenious, and Noble
ENDYMION PORTER, of His Majeſftics Bed-Chamber,
"PT yrs ws 9 Fn you covet not acknow- = Rex |<dgcments, receive what ber, | > longs to you by a double Titles your goodneſs hath preſery'd life d in the Author, then reſcu'd his work from. a "cruel Faction 9 ich nothing bur the Forces of your Reaſon, and your Reputation could ſubdue, If it.be+- ome your.pleaſure now, as when it had the a | e of Preſentation on the Stage, FT. ſha be taught, to boaſt ſome merit in my 7 (elf ; ;bue with this Inference ; you ſtill (asin that doubr- ful day of,uiy trial) endeavour tro make ſhew of o much Juſtice, as may countenance the lgys you bear to "A
Toxr moſt obliged, and thenkfoll * A bamble: Servant ow oF" Wil: AM D' AVENANT,
6 Haga, 2 Þy
_
Fd
ED DNR DCD TON PQ To the Reader of Sir William D'avenant's Play.
T hath been ſaid of old,that Plays are Feaſts, Poets the Cooks, and the Spectators Gueſts, The Acors Waiters: ' From this Similie , Some have deriv'd an unſafe libertie To uſe their Judgements as their Taſtes, which chuſe Without controul, this Diſh, and that refuſe : | Burt wit allows nor this large Priviledge ,” | Either you muſt confeſs, or feel irs edge; | Nor ſhall you make a currant Inference Ff you tranſ-ferr your Reaſon to your Senſe: Things are diſtin, and muſt the ſame appear [ | Toevery piercing Eye, or well-tun'd Ear, | Though ſweets with yours, ſharps beſt with my ſ taſte meet , Both muſt agree this meat's or ſharp or ſweet : Bur if Ifent a ſtench or a perfume, Whilſt you ſmell nonght ar all, I may preſume You have that ſenſe 1mperfe&: $o you may Aﬀect a ſad, merry, or humerous Play, If, though the kinde diſtaſte or pleaſe,the Goo And Bad, be by your Judgement underſtood, | © Bur if, asinthis Play, where with delight [ | I feaſt my Epicurean appetite F With reliſhes ſo curious, as _— | t
a Wd ww led , 7. 4
The utmoſt pleaſure to the raviſhe ſenſe, - STS ;
My
Yo
You ſhould profeſs that you can nothing meet | That hics your raſte, either with ſharp or ſyeer,
But cy our, 'Tis inſipid ; your bold Tongue May do it's Maſter, not the Author wrong; For Men of better Pallat will by it,
Take the juſt elevation of your Wit,
T.CAaREW.
TOPSSITISISTEFHS
OLDS GT DDIDIT LE
Tur PkoLoGus.
BW me you hinder Stars ! How are we throng'd:
Alas ! whom, hath our long-ſick-Poet wrong'd,
That he ſhould meet together in one day
A Seſfion, and a Faction at his Play ?
ToFudge, and to Condemne : For't cannot be
Amoneſt ſo many here, all ſhould agree,
Then 'tis/i0 ſuth viſt expectation rars'd,
As it were tobe wonder d at, not prais'd :
And this, good faith, Sir Poet ( if I've read
Cuſtomes, or Men ) ſtrikes you, and your Muſe dead!
Goff ave now too; how wwuch, how oft each Eare
Hath ſurfeit:dinthis our Hemiſpheare,
With various, pure, eternal Wit z and then
My fine young Comick Sir, y are kill'd agen.
But 'bove the miſchief of theſe feares, a ſort
Of cruel Spies ( we hear ) intend a ſport
Among themſelves ,) our mirth muſt not at all
Tickle, or ſtir their Lungs, but ſhake their Gall.
Sothis jeyn' dwith the reſt, makes me again
To ſay, Tou aud your Lady-Muſe within
Will lt aw but a ſad doom 5, and your trim Brow
Which Ang d: _ 10u woſt weare naked
'Leſ e Four reſolve out of a courteous pride,
ke and praiſe what others ſhall deride*
0 they'vetheir humor tco;, and wee in (pight
Of our dull Brains , will think each fide ith right.
Such is your he me uy cr w”_ ron aa ough ſew'y
Like Patalells that run ſtraieht, ways,
.  —— ——  —_—
CDEEASSILEIRA AL ACE4S. OR ne, — _ « ——_—y _
” ” - N . * * Cue *® - Wis aw * , - F ©» » \J _ . . %« ” \ %
_ ThePeffons of the Cormed Y-
Palatine the Elder: © © Richly Landed ani a Witt: . | 4 GIN? ; \ ich a9: $A Witt teo but lives op his ex* Palatine the rags hibuion pl Town, Sir Morglay Thwack, A humorons rich old X#i0bt. Sir Tirant Thrift, Guardian to the Lady Ample. A Souldier newly come from Meager, Holland Pert, His Comrade. Engine, Steward to Sir Tirant Thrift. An L heretrix, andWard to ir Loy Ample, Sir Tirant Thrift. Lucy Miſtreſs to the Tounger Pal, -1'T ' Jatine, Ginet, Woman tothe Lady Ample. Snore, A Conſtable. Afiftreſs Snore, His Wife. AMiftreſs Queaſie, Her Neighbour. Watchmen, &c, 3 The Scene LONDOW. The
.4. 8
x = ,
} \ -
_
0S430/23430 203.3 3.33 0 THE YEE
ACT. 1.''SCEN.'r. Q 4
Enter Towng Pallatine, Meager, Pert.
Toung Pallatine. Av == Eicome o'ſhore AMecager | Give me thy hand, {*T1s:a true one, and will no more- forſake” / MAN A Bond,or Pill, then;a good Sword z a hand RCSg That will ſhift for the Body, tillthe» Laws
m Provide for both. Xeag. Old Wine, andnew Cloaths, Sir, Make you wanton'! D*you nor fee Pere, my Comrade:? Yo. Pallat. Ambiguous Per, haſt thou danc'd to the Drum too ? 21 ; * Could a Faffra ſcaff, a long Eftridge whing,:. \.- - | A ſtiffe Iron: Doubler, and a' Brazeel Pole  * - Tempt theefrom:Cambrick theets, fine aQive Thighs, | Fron-Caudles. where the: precious Amber fwums ?
Pert. Faith,we have been to kill, weknow not whom, Nor why : Led oq to break a Commandement, Waththe conſent of Cuſtom andthe Laws; .
AMeag Mine was a certain inclination, Sir To do juiſchief, where: good men of the Jury, And a dull Congregationof gray beards Mighr urge'ng tedious Statute *gainſt my life-: Te. Pallar. Nothing bur Honour - could ſeduce thee, .'Pert. ' | ; Honor, which is the hope of the youthful, And the 01d Souldiers wealch, a jealouſie Tothe Noble, and miſtry.co:the wie. Pert, It was Sir, no Geographical fancie
als
gh
he |, (Cauſe
by
—_— — —2 LIE CIR
In Won
"The Skipper make you pay their paſſage over ?
2 The Wits. ( Cauſe in onr Maps, I lik'd this Region here More than'that Countrylying chere )made mg Partiat "which to fight for.
To. Pallat. True, ſ1ge Pert.
| Wharis't to thee whether one Don Diego
A Pririce, or Hans van Holm, Fritter-ſeller
Of Bombel, do conquer that Paraper,
Redout, or Town, which thou nere faw'ſt befqre ? Perr.'Nota brafs Thimble to me: but Honor !— To. Pallat.Why right !elſe wherefore ſhouldſt thou
bleed- for him,
Whoſe Maney, Wine, nor Wench, thounere haſt us'd?
Or why deſtroy ſome poor Root-eating' Souldier,
That never gave thee the Lye, deny*d to pledge
Thy Cockatrices health, nere ſpit upon
Thy Dog, jeer'd thy Spur-leather, or return'd
Thy Tooth-pick ragged, which he borrowed whole ? Pert, Never to my. knowledge !
Aeag. Comrade | tis time----
To.Pallat.What,tounſhip your Trunks at Billin/gate? Fierce M/earer! why ſuch haſte? do not I know , That a Mouſe yoak'd to:a Peſcod, may draw With the frail Cordage of one hair, your Goods Abour the World ?
Pert. Why we have Linnen Sir !
To. Pallat. As much Sir as will fill a Tinder-Box. Or makea Frog a ſhirr, I like not friends | This quietmodeſt poſture. of your Shoulders ! Why {tir you nor, as you were praQtifing To Fence, or do you hide your Cattel leſt
Pert. Know Pallatine ! Truth is a naked Lady, Shee will ſhew all; Meager, and I have not— | To. Pall. The Treaſure of Saint Afark; I believe, Sir, Though you are as rich as caſt Servingmen ,
Or Bawdsled thrice into Captivity | 5 Pert,
- RR. ORASE_s oe a
A
10M
4 >
e?
rate?
Y,
{Hf Sir,
1 Pert,
The- Wits. Pert. Thou haſta heart of the right ſtamp ;1 find It is nor-comely in thine eyes to ſee Us ſons of War walk by the pleaſant Vines Of Gaſcoiny, as we believ'd the Grapes Forbidden fruit ; ſneak through a Tavern. wich Kemorſe, as we had read the Alcaron, And made it our beſt Faith, ' Mear, And abſtain fleſh, As if our Engliſh Beef were all reſery'd For Sacrifice. Pert. Whilſt Colon keeps more noiſe Than Mariners at Playes, or Apple-wives That wrangle for a Sive. Ateag. Contribute, come. 7, | row Stand, there cloſe on your hives ! here in _..., Ms-houſe $4 Lives a rich old Hen, whoſe young Egg (though not Of her own laying) I have in che Empbers : | Shee may prove a Morſel, for a diſcreet mouth, If the kind Fates have but the leaſare 10 Betray the, old one... Port. Pallatine. No. plots upon generation,” wetwo Have faſted ſo long, that we cannot think Of hegetting any thing, unleſs Like. Cannibak, we. might eat our 0wn Iflue. To: Pallat, 1 ſay cloſe; ſhrink in your-Motions! go 1 | Meager. Why hidden thus? A Souldier may appear. Fe: Pallat. Yes mn.4 Sutlers Hur on: the Pay-day: But do you know the filence of this houle , The gravity and awe ?.here dwells a Lady, Thathath not ſeen. a ſtreet, ſince good King Harry —_ her to Me ſhe is pay wrergg | n a Weaver of Banbrry that hopes T intice Heaven-(;by finging.) re make him Lord Of twenty Looms, I never faw her yet: , And. to. arrive at my preferment firſt, In ypur ſweet company will (I take it) Add
4 The Wits, Add burlittle romy hopes. Retire ! goe !
T hey ſtep afede, whilſt he calls berween the Hangings Pert. Wehall obey, but do not tempt us now With ſweer-mears tor the nether Pallat | doe not—
To: Pallat., What Lucy! Luce now is the old Beldame Miſleading her to a C uſhion , where ſhe Muſt pray, and figh, and falt, untill her knees?
Grow ſmallerthen her Knuckles. Zucy ! Lace,”
No hope ! ſhe isundone ! ſhe'} number o're
As many Oriſons, as if ſhe had
A Buſhel ofBeads to her Roſary !
- Lacy my Aprill love ! my Miſtreſfe ſpeak !— Enter Lucy.
Lucy, Palatine, for Heavens fake keep in your voice! My crue!l Aunt will hear, and I amloft,
To: Pallat. What: can ſhe hear , when her old cares
are {tuff d With as muchwarm wax, as will ſeal nine Leaſes? W hat a pox does ſhe liſtning upon earth ? Fit not time forher Vaffect privacie ? To creep into a cloſe dark Vaulr,there go ſhip With worms and ſuch ſmall tame creatures, as Heayen Provided ro accompany old People?
Lucy. Still better*d unto worſe ! but that my hearr Conſents not to diſfigure thee, rhou would'ſt be rorne To pieces numberleſs as and, or as _—
The doubts of pile, or love, in Cowards are ! To: Pal. How now Lace | from whatsſtrange coaſt this ſtorm'! hah ! | ot
Lacy. Thou doſt our-drinke the'youth of Norway at Their Marriage feaſts, out-ſweara puny Gamſter When his firſtmisforrune rages ourquarrell,  *-**
One that rides poſt, and is opt by a Cart; ' *
Thy walking: hours are later in the night, 2208"
Then thoſe which Drawers, Traytors, or Conſtables Themſclyes do keep ; for Watchmen know thee Ds
ke kk... Wd wad
The Wits,
Then their Lanthorn ! and here's your Surgeons Bill, Your kind thrift ( i thanke you ) hath ſenc ic me To pay, as if the poor exhibition My Auntallows tor Aprons, would maintain - Þ| You in Seareclothes — Gives him a paper. y Meager. Can the Daughters of Brabant
Talke chus when Tonnker-gheck leads'em to a Stove?
Pert. 1Ifiy ( Meager ) = 154 ſmall parcel Of Man, that rebels more then all thereſt Of his body, and Iſhall need ( if 1 Stay here) no Elixir of Beefe ro exalc Nature, though I were leaner thena groat !
Yo: Pallat. This Surgeon's a Rogue ( Luce )) a fellow,
Luce, ©! | Thathath no more care ofa Gentlemans Credit, then of the Lint, he hath twice us'd ! boy Lucy, Well Sir, but what'sthat Inſtrument he names
To: Pall. He writes down here for a tool of Injection Luce, a ſmall water Engine which 1 bought For my Tayjordl Child to ſquirt at Prentiſes !
Luce. 1Sir, hefins more againſt wit then Feaven, That knows not how CYexcuſe what he hath done ! en | 1qſhallbe oldat twenty, Palatine,
My _ to ſee thy manners, and thy mind H uch wrought ſo much upon myhearc! ny To: Pallat. T'de as lieve keep our Marriage Supper In a Churchyard, and beget our Children In a Coffin, as hear thee propheſie ,
aſt Luce, thou art drunk Zace ; farr gone in Almond Mike, +} Kime! | at Perr. Now 1 diſſolve like an Eringo ? Meager. He's ploughing o'the inkies, good Gold "appear |! |
ir} Yo: Pallat.lam a new man, Zxce ; thou ſhale find me , | Ina Geneva-band that w2s reduc'd From an 0Jd Aldermans. Cuffe ;no more hair left
P.. trek hen
Then
. CEE TOE VP WI GE FEE 5 OUT ICY TR. PREP CEIT
3»
 Andfquire t
EO The Wits Then will ſhackle a flea; this debafh'd Whine-yard; I will reclaim ts comely Bow and Arrowes, And ſhoot with Habzrdaſhers at Finsbury, And be thought the Grand-child of Adam-Be/! And more ( my Luce ) hang at my yelyert Girdle, A Book o—_— in a greenDimiry Bagge, yuntooth'd Aunt to anexerciſe, Lacy. Nothing but ſtrict Laws,and age willtame you. To: Pallat. What money haſtrhou, Lace ? Lucy. 1there's your buſmeſs, To: Pallar, It is the buſineſs ofthe world : Injurics row Fo get 4 Juſtice ſits for the ſame end; Men are not wiſe withour it, for it makes Wiſedom known ; and to be a fool and poor, Is next t'old Aches and bad Fame; tis worſe Than to have fix new Creditors, they each Twelve Children, and not bread enough to make The Landlord a Toſt, when he calls for Ale And Rent. Think on that, and rob thy Aunts Trunks Ere ſhe hath time to make an Inventory. Pert. A canning Pioner ! he works to th*bottom, , Lacy .Haſt chou no taſte of Heay'n? wert thou begot In a Priſon, and bred up in a Galley ? To: Pallat. Lace \ I ſpeak like one that hath ſeen the Book Of Fate : I'm loth ( for thy ſake)to mount a Coach With two wheels, whilſt the Damzels of the Shop Cry out, A goodly ſtrait chird Gentleman / He dyes, for robbing an Atturnies Cloak-bag Of Copper-ſeals, foul Night-caps, together With his Wives bracelet of Mill-Telters Lacy. There Sir ! ___ Fling him a Purſe, Tis gold! my Pendants, Carkanets, and Rings, My Chriſtning Caudle-cup and Spoons Are diffoly'd to that Lump; Nay, take all /
And
The Wits, And with it as much anger as would make Thy Mother write thee illegitimate * See me no more * I will not ſtay to bleſs My gift leſt I ſhould teach my patience ſuffer Till I convert4t into Sin, Exit. " 70: Pallat. Temptations will not thrive. This bag- age flee T Croſ-legg'd, and the Devil has no more power O're that charm, thendead men ore their lewd Heirs, I muſt marry her, and ſpend my revenue In Cradles, Pins, and Sope! That's th'end of all Thar ſcape a deep River, and a tall Bough. Meag. Pallatine ! How much ? Pert. Honorable Pall } Te. Pallat. Gentlemen, you muſt accept without ga« in | Your & an, Oathes, to repay.in three dayes ! Pert. Not wee ( Pall )inthree Jubilics, fear nor! ' Yo: Pallat. Nor ſhall you charge mee with loud vehe- mence . | ( Thrice before company) to wait youin My chamber ſuch a night, for then, a certain Drover of the South comes to.pay you money | Meag. Onour new Faiths ! Pert, On our Allegiance Pall! To: Pall. Gothen ! —- ſhift, and bruſh your $kins well, you hear ! Meet me at the new Play ; faire, and perfum'd! There are ſtrange words hang on the lips of Rumor 1 Pert. Language of joydeere Pall | To: Pallat, This dayis come To Town, the Minion of the womb ( my Lads} My elder Brother, and hee moves like ſome - Aſſyrian Prince : his Chariots meaſure Leagues Wrty, as youthful Poets in their-wine! Bold as a Centaure ata Feaſt, and kind
OS EIT WISER ERA OE gs. a
$ The Wits," As Virgins that were. ne're beguild with love ! 1 ſeek him now, meet and triumph ! F Meager, King Pall ! — Exeunt Omner, BM L Pert. W , Enter Sir Morglay Thwack, Eld. Pallatine, new and richly clothed, buttoning themſelves. Eld. Pallat. Sir Morglay | come ! the houres have _._. wings, and you Are growntoo old, r'overtake then - The Town Lookes( me thinks) as it would invite the Country Toa Feaſt. | Thwack. At which Serjeants and their Yeomen Muſt be no Waiters ( Pallatine ) leſt ſome O'the Gueſts pretend buſineſs : how doſt like me 3 © Elaey Pallat;zAs one, old women ſhall nd more avoid, Y Then they can warm Furrsor Muskadell ! Th Tbwath.Pallatine | to have a volatile Ache, Thatremoves oftner thenthe Tartars Camp , To have a ſtirch that ſucks a man awry,” Till he ſhew crooked as a Cheſtnnt Bough, Or ſtand in the deform'd Guard of a Fencer .
To have theſe hidin Fleſh, that has liv'd ſinfull or t Fifty long yeares; yet hnsband, ſo much ſtrength Yo As could convey me hither, fourſcore Miles hat.  Ona deſigne of Wit, and glory may hy Be Regpiſtred for a ſtrange Northern AR; om
Eld. Pallat. 1 cannot boaſt thoſe Noble Maladies El, As yet; but Time ( dear Knight Jas I have heard, , Þ Jak
May make mans knowledge bold npon himſelf. ] We travellin the grand cauſe ! Theſe ſmoorh Rags, CC Theſe Jewels too, that ſeem to ſmile e're they 0 be Betray, are cercain filly ſnares, in which tte Your Lady-wits, andtheir wiſe Compeers-Maſe T by May chance be caught! "ah au
|
ſ
+ WP 112 4 F ntey bum
The Writs. 9 Emir Toung Pallatine.
Ye: Pallat. You're welcome ( Noble Brother) Mult be hereafter ſpoke, for I have loſt, With glad haſte to find you, much of my Breath ! — wh Ed. Pallat. Your joy becomes you, it hath Courc-
pin't :
Yo, Pallat. Sir Morglay Thwask/1 did expe to fee The Archer Cimbeline, or old King Lud Advance his Fauchion here agen, e'ce you Monglt ſo much ſmoke, diſeaſes, Law, and noiſe!
T hwack, What your Town gets by me, let *um lay "For their Orphans, and Record in theix Annals ! I come to borrow where Ile never lend , nd to buy what Ile never pay for.
Yo. Pallat. Not your Debts? | *# 7hiack, No Sir, though to a poor Browniſt's widow  Whough ſhe ſigh all night, and have the next morning othing to drink, but her own Tears,
El. Pallat. Nor ſhalt thou lend money to a ſick friend,
hough the ſad worm ly morgag'd in his bed or the hire of his Sheets.
Yo, Pallat. Theſe are Reſolyes, hat give me newer wonder than your Cloathes :
hy in ſuch ſhining Trim, like Men that come
om rifled Tents, loaden with victory ?
Eld. Pal. Yes Brother, or like eager heirs new dipp'd 1 Inke, that ſeal'd the day before in haſte,
Parchment ſhould grow dear. Know youth we
come
0 bethe buſineſs of all Eyes, to take
be wall of our $. George on his Feaſt day :
Thwack. Yes, and then imbark at Dover, and do
he like to St. Demnzs : All this ( young Sir ) ' Pithout charge too, I mean, to us, we bring 5 Fhumerous odd gploghy on Town
id
4
—
That
EY my LS
14
10 The Wits, That ſays, pay nothing! 70, Pal. Why, where have I
liv'd ? Eld. Pal. Brotherbe calm, and edifie 1 But firſt Rective a Principle, never hereafter (From this warm breathing, till your laſt cold ſigh) Will I disburſe for you agen, Never / 75: Pal. Brother mine, if that be your Argument, I deny the Major : Thwack, Refiſt Principles? | El. Pal.Good faith, though you ſhould ſend me more Epiltles Than young Factors in their firſt voyage write Unto their ſhort bair*d Friends, than abſent Lovers Pen neer their Mariage-week, t'excuſe the flow Arrival of the Licenſe, and the Ring , Not one =_> penny ſhould depart my reach. Yo. Pal. This DoQtrine will not paſs, how ſhall I live FI. Pal. As we intend to do, by our good wits: Ye. Pa/. How, Brother, how? - Ed. Pal. Truthis a pleaſant knowledge , Yet you ſhall have her cheap, Sir 1orglay here, 7 (My kind Diſciple)-and my ſelf, have leas'd of Our all our Rents and Lands for pious uſes ! A Yo. Pal. What, Co-founders! give Legacies Wh. death : Pallatine the pious, and St Mor lay : Your names will ſound but ill 'uh Kalender. How long muſt this fierce raging zeal continue ? Ela. Pal. Till weſubſiſt here no more by our. wit Then wee'l renounce the Town, and patiently Vouchfafe to reaſſume our Mother Earth, Lead on our Ploughs into their walks Agen, grope our young Heifers in the flank, - fwagger in the Wool, we- ſhall borrow -  - From our own flocks, 7hwack. But ere we $0, Wh From the vaſt treaſure purchagd by our _— oy cay ©
as i wil > fea
Ol E
—_— 7
_ "The Wits: 7 Leave here ſome Monument to ſpeak out Fame, I have a ſtrong mind to re-edific The decays of Fleer-airch, from whenceT hear Theroaring Yeſtals late are fled; through hear Of perſecution, Yo, Pa/. Whara ſmall ſtar have 1 * Thar never yet could light me to this way : Live by our wits ?EJ, Pal. So live, that Uſurers, Shall call cheir Monies in, remove their Banke T Ordinaries, Spring garden, and Hide-Park, Whilſt cheir glad Sons are left ſeven for cheir chance} Ar Hazard, Hundred, and all made at Sent x Three motly Cocks o'th right Derby ſtrain, : Together with a Foal of Beggibrippe! : T. F Sir, I will match my Lord Maiors Horſe, make 0CRe)s - " Of his Hench-boyes, and run *em through Cheap-ſide. | Ed. Pallat. What beauties Girles of feature govera/ now I'th town ? "tis long ſince we did traffick here, In midnighe whiſpers, when the Diale& Of Loveslooſe Wir, is frighted into figns, And ſecret laughter ſtifled inro ſmiles : When nothing'sloud but the old Nurſe's cough ; Who keeps the Game up, hah! who miſled now ? Thw. NotSir, that,if we woo, wee'l be at charge  JFor Looks, orif we marry, make a 7oyntare, Entail Land on women? entail a Back, And ſo much elſe of Man, as Nature did 6 er for the. firſt wife, ,E/4, Pallat. Icould keep thee, hy fucure Pride, thy Surfets and thy Luſt, Lmean, in ſuch agarb as may become & Chriſtian Gentleman) with the ſole Tithe Or 7 r:bte, 1 ſhall now receive from Ladies, bt Thack, Your Brother,and my ſelf have ſeald to Cozy The Fetnale Youch o'th rown are this; but all (nar. 2 ew ro ang B 2 then c——_ from
Ye
—
—— ye
I2.. The Wits. From forty t®fourſcore, mine own : A widow (Youllty ) isa wiſe, ſolemn, wary Creature , Though the bath liv'd co'th cunning of diſpatch, Clos'd up nine Husbands eyes, and have the wealth Of all rheir Teſtamevts, in one Month Sir, I will waſte her to her firſt Wedding-ſmock ,  Herfingle Ring, Bodkin, and Velyet-Muff, Yo: Pallar, Your Rents expos d at home, for Pious Muſt expiate your behaviour here; Tell me, (uſes thar the ſubtle plot you baye on Heaven? Thwack. The worm of your worſhips conſcienge would appear _ | As Wu a Cenger, but a good eye May chance to Ede it ſlender as a Grigge :
Yo Pal, Amazement knows no eaſe, but in demands, Pray tell me Gentlemen, to all this vaſte Defignment \ which ſo {trikes my Ear) deduRt You novght from your revenue, nought that may Like Fuell, feed the flame of yourexpenſe ?
E1d. P#.Brother, not ſo much as will find a Few Bacon to his Eggs : Theſe gay tempting Weeds, Theſe Eaſtern ftones of cunning foil beſpoke Gain onr arrival here, rogerher with A certain ſtock of Crownsin cithers purſe,
Is all the charge that from our proper own,
Begins or furthers the megnifique plot,
And of theſe Crowns, not one mult be uſurp'd
By you. Thwack, No relief, but Wit and good Counſel! Ed. Pal. The ſtock my Father left you, if your care
Had purpos'd ſodiſcreet a courſe, might well
Have ſet you up ith Trade, but we ſpend light :
Our Coach is yet unwheel'd, Sir forglay, come,
— ens —— —
e_ loft mos a...
hay
Let's ſute thoſe Frieſlard horſe with our own ſtrain: Yo. Pal. Why Gentlemen, will the deſign keep horſes
..T bwack, May be Sir they ſhall live by their wits too!
aNo. Pal, Their Maftersare bad Tutors elſe; well, Nl ou
F «A ' wo
s,
The FVVits. xt} You'l worke the Ladies, and weak Gentry here By your fine gilded Pills, a Fairhthar is Nor old may gueſs withour diſtrult, But Sirs, The Citty ( take*r on my experiment) Will not be gulf d! Thwack, Not gull'd ? they dare not be So impudent ! I ſay they ſhill be gull'd,
And trult, and break, and pawn their Charrey too ! | Yo: Pallat. Is it lawiul ( Brother ) for me to laugh That have no money ? |
Eld. Pallat.. Yes Sir, at your elf! ( Arts, To: Pallat. Twothat Ive taſted Natures kindneſs And men, have ſhin'd in moving Camps , have ſeen Courts in their ſolemn buſineſs, and vain pride; Convers'd ſo long i'th town here, that you know Each Sign, and Pibble in the ſtreets, tor you ( After a long retirement ) to leife forth Your wealthy pleaſant Lands, tofeed 7ubn Crump, The Cripple, widow Needy, and 45raham Sloath, the Bead/-man of AMore-dal:? | hen (forſooth) Perſwade your ſclyes to live here by your W1 s. Thwack. Where wee ne're cheared in our Youth, we reſolve | To couzenin our Ape. F14. Pallat. Brother, I came To be your wiſe example in the Arts That lead to thrivingglory, and fupream life, Not through the humble ways wherein dull Lords Of Lands, and Sheep do walk : Men chat depend Onthe fantaſtick winds, on fleeting Clowds, On ſcaſons more uncertain than themſelves, When they would hope or fear ; But you are warm In anothers Silke, and make your tame eaſe | Virrue, call ic content, and quietneſs ! | Thwack, Write Letters to your Brother ! do-tnd be Forſwornin every long Parenthefi;, > I wo B 3 For
[—_
Ou 0 —_—C— —
14 The Wits, For twenty pound ſent you in Butchers Silver ! E1d.Pall, Rebukes are precious | caſt them not away! To: Pall. Neither of theſe Philoſophers were born To above five Senſes, why then ſhould they Have hope, to do _ greater, and more new Yth world, than I? This Devill Plenty thruſts Strange boldneſs upon Men ! well, you may laugh With ſo much violence, till it conſume Yourbreath ! Though ſullein Want, the Enemy Of Wit, have ſunke her low; if pregnant Wine Canraife her up, this day ſhe ſhall be mine, Ex.
ACT, 2, SCEN, 1, Enter the Lady Ample, Engine, Ginet.
(Engine ? + "Ampl. My Guardian hors'd ? this evening fay'it thou Engin, It's an hour (Madam ) fince he ſmelc the Town. _ "Ampl.Saw'{tthou his ſlender empty leg in th'Stirrop? His Iv'ry Box on his ſmqoth Ebon ſtaffe New civitted, and tyed to's gouty wriſt ? With his warp'd face cloſe-butron'd in his Hood, That Men may take him for a Monk diſpuis'd, And fled poſt from a Purſevant ! ( cunning Exgin, ( Madam ) beware I pray, leſt th'Age and He is Maſter of, prepare you a Reyenge, And ſuch as your fine wit ſhall ne*re intreat Your patience to diſgeſt. To morrow night TlYextreameſt Minute of your Wardſhipis Expir'd, and we Magicians of the houſe Believe this haſty Journey he hath tane Is to provide a Husband for your ſheets ! Ampl. And ſuch a one as judgement and nine Eics Maſt needs diſlike, that's compoſition may Grow upto his ownthcifty wiſh, Eng. Madam.
Your
£
: + YE # *, o
'&
106
nd
our
The Wits, * I5 Your Arrow was wellaym'd : Icall him Maſter, ButLam Servant unto Iruth, and You.
Ampl. He chuſe a Husband, fit to guide, and ſway My Beauties wealthy Doury, and my heart ? | We make EleQtion to delight -my ſelf :
What compoſition ſtriteſt Laws will give His Guardianſhip may take from the rich Banke My Father leſt, and not devour my Land. | Ginet, Your Ladyſhip has liv'd fix years beneath His roof, therefore may gueſs the colour Of his heart, and what his brains do weigh. But Engine ( Madam ) is your humble Creature.
Ampl, I have bounty, Engine |!
And thou ſhalt largely taſte it, when the next
Fair Sun is ſet, for then my Wardſhip ends — K mcking
That ſpeaks command,or haſte: open the door. (within
Enter Lucy,
Lacy | weeping my wench ? melting thine Eies,
As -7 you treſpaſs'd againſt light, and thou
Wouldit give them darkneſs for a puniſhmenr, (what
Lacy. Undone ( Madam ) without all hope, bur
Your pitty will youchſafe to. miniſter !
Ampl. Haſt thou been ſtruck by infamy ? or com'it
A Mourner from the Funeral of Love ?
Lucy, Tamthe Mourner, and the Mourn'd : dead to
My ſel, but left not rich enough to buy a Grave ; + My cruel Aunt hath baniſh'd me her Roof.
Expos'd me to the night, the winds, and what The raging Elements on wanderers lay,
Left naked, as firſt Infancie or Truth,
Ginet. I could nere indure that old moiſt ey'd Lady !
Me thought ſlte pray'd too off,
' Ampl. A meerreceipt
To make her long winded, which our devout
Phyſicians now preſcribe to defer death.
But Zcy, can ſhe urge no cauſe for this
B 4 Strange
Omnrrmmn ooenoe -  O———— —_—_ OT IEPror Dees eres mo en Es, CS
op The Wits,
Strange wrath, that you would willingly conceale ! Lucy. Suſpitions of my Chaſtity; which heaven
Muſt needs reliſt as falſe : though the accus'd '
Mee even in dream,where thoughts commit by chance, Not Appetite. Amp. Whar ground had her ſuſpe ? Lucy. Young Pallatine ( that woo'd my heartuntil
He g1ther'd Fondneſs where he planted Love ) Was faln into ſuch want, as eager blood, And Youth could not endure, and keep the Law Inviol-te. I to prevent my fear, ; Sold all my Jewels and my trifling wealth Beſtow'd them on him , and ſhe chinks a more Unholy conſequence atrends the guift. Ampl. This Lace, is ſuch Apoſtacie in Wit, As Nature muſt degrade herſelfin woman to - Forgive? ſhall Zove put thee to charge? couldſt thou Permit thy Lover to become thy Per fioner ? Engin. Her ſenſe will now be tickied till it ake ! Amp, Thy feature and thy wit, are! wealth enough Tokeepthee high in ell choſe vanities P That wilde ambition, or expenſive pride Perform in youth : but thou invert ſt theiruſe Thy Lover like the fooliſh Adamanrt, The ſteele , thou fiercely doſt allure, and draw, To ſpend thy vertue, not to get by ir. Lacy. This DoQtrine,( Madam ) is but new to me. Ampl. How have 1 liv'd chinkſt thou , &en by my Wits ! = My Guardians contribution give us Gownes : But cut from th'curtains of a Cariers bed : -Tewels wee wore, bnt ſuch as Potters wives Bake in the Furnace for their daughters wriſts | My wom:ns Smock's ſo coarſe, as they were ſpun  O'ch rackling of a'Ship.. Grzer. A Coat of Male "Quilted with Wyre, w:s ſoft ſarſhet to'um. Amp. Ourdyet, ſcarſeſo much asis preſcrib'd =" 33. ”"&..Y To
by *
Ul #2 SS
- LEG
ay
The Wits.
| 7 o mortifie : Two Egges of Emmets poach'd,
\ ſingle Bird no bigger than a Bee,
fade up a Feaſt.. Giner. He had ſtary'd me. but that he Green-ſickneſs rook away my ſtomack ! Ampl. 1 by diſeaſe ( Ginet:) made thee in ove with id tho'eateſt him up two foot of an old wall /(Morter, E»gin, A priviledge my Maſter onely gave "=, ah teeth, none elſe o'th houſe durſt do'r, Ampl. When ( Lacy )I perceiv'd this ſtraitned life, Watrre ( my Steward ) 1 did call Cacompr, \nd crook from her Exchequer ſo much Wir $ has maintain'd mefince. I led my fixe [rim bearded Males in a ſmall ſubtle ſtring Dfmy ſoft haire : made*um to offer up, nd bow, and laugh'd at the Idolatry. Ginet. A Jewell for a kiſs, and that half;raviſh'd. Lacy. 1 feel Iaminclin'dCindeavour in Calling ( Madam) Fd beglad to live! Ample. Know ( Lace ) this is no Hoſpital for Fools! yBed is yours, but on condition Lece, [hat you redeem the Credit of your Sex : hat you begin to tempt, and when the ſnare ath caught the Fowle, you plume him till you get ore feathers then you loſt to Palatine. Lacy. I ſhall not waſte my houres in winding Silke, Or ſhealing Peſcods with your Ladiſhip ! Ampl.Froſt's on my heart! what? give unto a Suitor ! now; 1 would fain behold that filly Monarch, Bearded Man! ) thar durſt wooe me with half jo impudent a hope 1 | E»g. Madam, you are ot far from the poſſeſſion of your wiſh, here is no language heard, no buſineſs now town, but whar proclaims th'arriyal here This morne ) of th'elder Pa/larine, Brother o him younam'd, and with him ſuch anold mperial buskin Knight as the Iſle nere ſaw. gn I nd 2” | Ampe
13 The Wits,
Amp. What's their deſign ?
Eng. They will immute themſelves With Diamonds, with all refulgent Stones, That merit price : aske *em who payes? why Ladies ! They'l feaſt with rich Provincial wines, who pays ? Ladies. They'l ſhine in various habit, like Eternal Bridegrooms of the day, aske *em Who payes ? Ladies, Lie with thoſe Ladies too, Anc
And pay'em bur with Ifſue-Male, that ſhall Aſt
Inherit nothing but their wir, and doe Sho
Thelike to Ladies, when they grow to age. 1
Luce. My eares receiv'd a taſte of them before. ?
Ampl. Engine, how ſhall we ſee them ? bleſs me, FWit Empine
With thy kind voice. Eg Though Miraclesare ceas'd, This ( Madam's ) inthe power of Thought, and Time,
Ampl. 1 would kiſs thee Ergine,but for an odd Nice humour in my lips ; they bliſter at | Inferiour breath ! This Ring, and all my hopes Are thine , deare Engine now projeR and live !
Ginet,I'de looſe my Wedding to behold theſe Dage
nets !
Ample. My Guardian's out o*Town ! let as triumpi Like Ceſar, tillto morrow night | thou knowſt, I'mthen no more o*ch Family ! I would Like a departing Lamp before I leave You in the darke, ſpread ina glorious blaze !
E»gir. Madam, command the Keyes, the houſe,
me, | Amp. Spoke like the bold Cophetad's Son |! | Let us contrive within to tempt *um hither : Follow, my Luce, reſtore thy felfto Fame | — - | Ex. Eng. Amp. Gin. Young . Pallatine becketts Lt) from between the Hangings, as ſht is going. To: Pall. Luce | Lace | | Lncy. Deach onmyEyes! how came you hither S
1.10 0d
The Wits. 12 Yo: Pallat. Y'm,' Lace, a kind of perempto By Shift houſes ſtill to follow the Sun-beams } PET | muſt needs play in the flames of thy beauty ! Lucy. Y have us'd me with a Chriſtian care, have you not ? To: Pallat. Come I know all ! P have been at thy Aunts houſe. And there committed more diforder than Aſtorm in a Ship, or a Cannon Buller Shot through a Kitchin among ſhelves of Pewter. Lucy. This madneſs is not true I hope ! To: Pall. Yes Faith. itneſs a ſhower of Malmſey Lees, drop'd from by Aunts own Urinal, on this new Motion ! —
Lacy. Why you have ſeen her then >
No: Pallat, Yes, and ſhe looks like the old Slut of Babylon
hou haſtread of. Ttold her ſhe muſt dye,
\nd her beloved Velvet-Hood be ſold
To ſome Dutch Brewer of Ratcliffe, to make
is Tex Frowe {lippers.
Lucy. Speak low ! I am deprived: wBBy thy raſh wine, ofall atonement now, nto her after-Legacies or Love ! | To: Pallat. My Luce) bemagnifi'd! Tamall plot || Stratagem ! My Brother is in Town ;
ly Lady Ample's Fame hath caught him Girle : andy'm told he means an inſtant viſit hither.
Lacy. What happineſs from this ?
Yo: Pallat. As he departs rom hence, I have laid ewo Inſtruments, Xeager {and Perr, that ſhall encounter his long eares Fitch tales leſs true than thoſe of T yoy, they ſhall \Endanger him, maugre his aRive wits,
'P\idmount theefictle Zace, that thou mayſt reach 0 dindle Fate, to ſooth them till they give =
s !
—— ”
20 The Wits. Us Jeave to make, or alter deſtinies! Lacy. Youaretoo lowd ! whiſper your plots withi 4 | Exe Enter Engine, Elder P allatine, Thwack, _— You call, and goyern Gentlemen, as if Your buſineſs were above your haſte ; but know You where you are? El4. Pallat. Sir Tirant Thrift dwels here ! The Lady Ample is his Ward : ſhe is Within, and we muſtſce her, No excuſes! Shee is not old enoughto be lock'd up To ſee new Perukes, or purge for Rhewme. Thwack, Tell her, that a young devout Knigh made gray By a charm ( Yavoid temptation in others ) Would ſpeak with her. Engin I ſhall deliver you bot! Theſe Tygers hunt their prey with a ſtrange Noſthr Come unſent for fo aptly to our wiſh ?— Ex. Eld: Pallat. But this Sir Morglay will not doe, troth You break our Covenants. Thmwack, Why hear me plead ! Eld. Pallar. From forty to fourſcoure, the wrict!
Law
| Runs ſo, this Lady's in her Nonage yer, :
| And youto preſs into my company Where viſitations are decreed mine own, The Arguesa heat that my rebukes muſt cool. It Thwa. What ſhould 1 do? wouldſt have me keep}, £ | my chamber The | And mend Darke Lanthorns , invent ſteel Afarrocks, for { Or weigh Gan-powder, ſolitude? leads me #*? To nothing leſs than Treaſon; hill conſp:re .E Todig, and blow up all rather than fit fill. en
E14. Pallat. Follow your Taske you ſee how earl Have found this young [nheretyix, ' goe ſeck
= —ww—9% 44 we
The Wits, © 2x
be aged out, Bones, unto Bones { Like Cards
ich; pack'd, ſhuffle you ſelves together till
| oueach diſlike the game £ Thwack, Tis the cauſe I
ame for; a wither'd Midwife, or a Nurſe
Who draws her lips together, like an eye
ſhat gives che cautionary wink, are thoſe
| would find here, fo they berich, and fat ;—<
Exter Ginet, Ginet. My Lady underſtands your haſte, and ſhe ſelf conſults now in affairs of haſte,
Butyet will haſtily approach, to ſee n ou Gentlemen,and thenin haſtereturn : Ex.
* E/d. Pal.What's this the Superſcription of a Packet ? Thwack. Now does my blood wamble , you Sucket cater /
bot Offers to follow. ber, Pallatine ſtays him,
hrilff E/4. Pal. Theſe Covenants (Knight) will never be obſerv'd,
Ye fue the forfeiture, leave you ſopoor
ill for preferment you become an Eunuch,
And fing a Treble , in a Chauntry, Knight, Enter Ample, Lucy, Ginet. Elder Pallatine, and T hwack, addreſs to kiſs them, and arc thruſt back, Ample. Stay Gentlemen, good ſouls they have ſeen (Lucy) | The Country Turtles bill, and think our lips | Ith Town, mn Conriugee __ oe the fame Alone Lucy. Pray how do the Ladies there ? poor Villagers wy They churn ſtill, keep their Dayries, and lay [up rocks for imbroidered Mantles againſt the Heirs birth : Ample. Who is begor i'th Chriſtmas Holydays. | E14, Pal. Yes ſurely, when che Spirit of Mince-Pie Raipns in the blood, Ampl. Whac ? penny Gleek I A hope's Y In faſhion yer, and the treacherous foot
ugh
"1 b
writ
Not
—O—
& The Wits, © Not wanting 6n the Table frame to jogp The Husband, leſt he loſe the Noble thar Should pay the Grocers man, for Spice and Fruir. "_ The good old Butter ſharestoo, wich his L#
a | Inthe Box, bating for Candles that were burnt After rhe Clock ftruck ten. Thwack, He doth indeed, F Poor Country Madamsth'are in SabjeRtion (till , The beaſts heir hnsbands make *ern fir-on three d ſtools, like homely Depts of an Hoſpital, To knit ſocks for their cloven E/4. Pallar, And when theſe, tyrant Husbands too;F - grow old (As they have ſtill th'mpudence to live long ) Good Ladies they are fainto waſte the ſweet And pleafant ſeaſons of the day in boyling Jelkes for then, and rowling little Pills © Of Cambrick Lint to ſtuff their hollow teerh. FT Lucy. And.chen the Evenings (warrant yee/ they" With mother SpeRacle the Curar's wife, ſpend Who does inveigh*gainſt curling and dyde Cheeks, Heaves her devout impatient noſe at oyle Of 7eſſamin, andthinks powder bf Pars more ' Prophane then the, aſhes of a Romiſh Martyr. , F. " Ample. And inthe days of joy and triumph Sir, Which come as ſeldome ro, them as new gowns, ft Then humble wretches they doe frisk and dance In narrow Parfots,ro'a fingle Fiddle, Thar ſquekes forth tunes hke a departing Pig. Lucy. Whilſtthe mad Hinds, ſhake from rheit feet more dirt. MAR” Sl: Then did the Cedar-Roots, that danc'd to Orphens, . ; ; {mple-Do hey not pour theit wine too, from an
Or ſmall gilt Cruſe, like Orange-water kept To. ſprinkle holyday Beards? ©
U7 Lacy. And when a Stranger comes, ſend ſeven miles”
By Moon-ſhine, for another pint ? 4s Ela. — All cheſe indeed, are heavy truths, but 'o you (th'exemplar Madams of the Town 2) ed Play away your youth, as our haſty Gameſters " heir light Gold, not wich deſire to loſe it, utin a fond miſtake that it will-fix þ other uſe ? 7hwack, And then reſerve your ape Superſtitious Sinners ill wealth oo chaps for*th Church, perhaps for Hoſpitals, "1 "9 E/, Pallat. If rich you come-to-Court, there learn to be | t charge to teach your Paraqueeto's French, id then allow them their Interpreters, the Sage Fowl ſhoald loſe their wiſdome on ch Pages of the preſence, and the- Guard X have not paſt the Seas. Thwack, But if y'are poor, ALike wanton Monkies, chain d 'from Fruit, Fou feed upon the itch of your own Tails, Lncy. Roſe-Vinegar to waſh.char Kuffians mouth ! _ They come to live here by their Wits, let chem e*em :; | - [-Lacy. They have ſo few, and thoſe they ſpend'fo faſt, " Whey will leave none remairing to maintain chem. Ed. Pallat. You ſhall maintainus; » communitie Phe ſubtle have decreed pf late: You ſhall ndow us with your Bodies, and your Goods ; feetÞet uſe no Manacles eall'd dull Matrimony Po oblige affeRion againſt wiſe'Natare , 13.4 ' - Where tis loſt (perhaps) through a difparity-'-/ © + 1 a(v# years, or jultly't diſtaſteof crimes) | © "4 Amnpl. Moſtexcellent-Refolves 4 © 7 Ed: Pallat. Bur if youl needs marry\, Expect not a ſingle Taff for x Joynrure ;
i +
, ,
?
Nor
14 The Wits, | Not ſo much Land as will allow a Graſhopper 'Þ VN A Sallad ! 7hwac.I would no more doubt enjoy | A You two in all varictyof wiſhes, | (:Wer'thort for certain Covenants that I lately
Signd to in my drink) than I would fear V/ury H In a ſmall Poet, 6r a caſt Corporal, Ampt. You would M not / W
Thwack. But look to your old Widdows /? There my title's good ; ſee they be rich too, Bt Leſt I ſhall leave their Twins upon the Pariſh, An To whom the Deputy v'ch Ward will deny De
4
Blew Coats at ;Loaves at Funerals, Cauſe they were Sons of an old Country Wit ! Ampl. = all for Widows Sir, can nothing that Is young affe&t your mouldy appetite ? | Thw. No,in ſooth:Damſels at your years are wont} An To talk:to0 much over cheir Xfarmaled, - They can't fare well, but all the Town muſt hear't! E Their love's ſo full of prayſes, and ſo loud, A man may withlefs noiſe, lye with a Drum, Dis Ampl. Think you o Sir? Que Thw. Give me anold Widow that commits Sin Ly With: the gravity of a corrupt Judge , E- Accepts of Benefits i'th dark, and can E/, Conceal them from the 'light. Ample takes elder Pal}. 0 apart. Ne cus Pray Sir allow me but your ear aſide :
Though this rude Clime th Clough, preſume
In his deſires more then his tr can juſtifie, You ſhould haye nobler kindneſs chan to think All Ladies relliſh of an appetite,
Bad as the worſt your evill chance hath found. _ Ela. Pa. Allare alike to me: at leaſt, 1'le make Them ſo, with this perſwaſion , ;and aſhore = Expence of time, | Ample, Then L have caſt away
The Wits, My fight; my eyes have took'd themſelves iritb A ſtrong diſeaſe, but they ſhall bleed for ir, E/d. Pal. Troth Lady mine, I find fmall remedy! * Ample. Why came you hither Sir, ſhe char ſtall ſigh Her eaſe ſpirits into wind for you, Muſt not have hope; the kindneſs of your breath Will ere recover her. Loty. What do I hear? Hymen defend / But three good cornersto your little hearr, And two already broyling on Loves Altar ? Does this become her Giner, ſpeak ? Ginet. As age and half a finock would become me. Thwack, TiYaſt caught her Palatine ; infinuace r Rogue ? | Lacy. Love him, you muſt recant, 6r the ſmall god ont} And I ſhall quarrel when we meer i'th clouds. Thwack, Y light, ſee how ſhe ſtands, ſpeak to. her. E/4. Pal. Peace Knight ! it is apt cunning that we £0 3 Disdain 1s like to water ponr'd on Ice, Quenches the flame a while to raiſe it higher. Lacy. Engine ſhew them their way. —Enter Ex25nt? Engine. It lies here Gentlemen ! .—- E/4. Pal. There needs {mall ſummons,we are gone! bir Pal:4. C'youhear, We will receive no Letters, we though ſert By th incorporeal fpy your Dwarff, or. Aud>y WF che Chamber, hee would deliver them With as much cantion, as they were Attachments Ipon Money newly paid. Thw. Nor no meflage From the old Widow your Mother (if you Kave one) no, no though ſhe fend for me when ſhe. giving up her teſty Ghoſt ; and lies | if 2 Rhume, thoſe floods of Rhame, 1 whic : | Maids do daily dive to feek the Teedd [PG
-—
2F -
M
N. The Wits, She cough'd out laſt — Exexnm Engine, El4. P all. Thu; Lecy. Laſſe! good old Gentleman ! We ſhall ſee him ſhortly in as many Night-caps,
As would make fick Afahomet a Turband For the Winter. Amp. Are they gone Late ?
Lzcy. Not hke the hours, for they"! return agen ( Ere long; O you carry'd your falſe love rarely | I
Amp. How impudent theſe Country fellows are? I Lzcy. He thinks y'are caught ; he has you between's | - teeth, T
And intends you for the very next bic He means to ſwallow, Amp. Lace, 1 have a thouſandJ C
thoughts | More then a Kerchief can keep in : Quick Girl! Al Let vs conſult, and thou ſhalr find what filly Snipes I He
Their own confeſſion too, or i'le cry Flownders elle,
| Theſe witty Gentlemen ſhall prove, andin 0 And walk with my Perticoat tuck'd up like
A long maid of Almainery. Exemunt. ]
Emer To. Pallatine, IMeager, Pert, the two laſs JA
being new cloath'd. . Rur
Yo: Pall. Don Meager , and Don Pert , you neitheqDot
found Wil
Theſe imbroidered skins in your mothers womb: T
| Surely Natures Wardrobe is not thus lac'd ! « The Pert. We flouriſh Pall, by th*Charter of thy ſmiles, Þt:
| A lictle magnify'd, wich ſhew and thought To.
| Of our new plot, Aeag.The chamber's bravely hungY Pe
| Pert. To thy own wiſh, a Bed and Canopy One
Prepar'd all from our numbred pence if it arti
| Should fail, Afcager, and I muſt creep into AM
Our —_ rags, a tranſmigration Pall , isa
| Which our Divinity can ill indure. ad *
h Aeag. If 1 have more leftto maintain a large Riſm!
ſtomack f l thy
And along Bladder, than one comety Shilling, Yolſ
\ 4 at, »
The Wits, Together with afingle ounce of hope, Jam the Son of a Carr-man,70: Pallar. Do you ſuſpe& my promiſes, ' That am your Mint, your grand Exchequer? Pert. Pall, Noſuſpitions Pall, but we that imbark
Our whole ſtock in one Veſlel, would be glad To have all Pyrats o'ſhore, and the winds Ina calm humour ! Afeag. How fares th? intelligence Þ -ns8 7o. Pal. I left 'um atthe Lady Amples houſe
This ſtreet they needs muſt paſs, if they reach home.
; Pert. O,I would fain projeR *gainſt the old Knighe, and} Can we notſhare him too? Yo: Pall, This wheel muſt move
Alone, Sir Morglay T hwack's too rugged yer,
Heel interrupt the courſe, a little more
Oh File, wittſmooth himfir co be ſcrew'd up ; e, Pert.Shrink off Pal, I hear 'em 1
Enter T hwack,, Elder Pallatine,
et. | E/ad. Pal. Thihaſt notthe art of patient leifure to $ Fattend the aptitude of things; wouldſt thou
Run on hke a rude Bull, on every obje& that icheeJDoth heat the blood ? this cunning abſtinence
Will make her paſſions grow more violent.
Thwack, But Pallatine, | do not find I have
The cruelty, or grace, to let a Lady les, PFarve for a warm morſel—Pert and Meager take the To. Pal. Now my fine Pert ! Elder Pallatine aſide, hungY Peyr. Sir, we have buſineſs for your Ear, it may dncern you much,therefore tis fit it be articular, E/. Pal. From whom !
AG A young Lady, Sir ,
%
wW.
is a ſecret will exa& much care
d wiſdome ithdelivery, you ſhould ? ge iqpi pt7] Gentleman; Ek Pal. A young Lady + [
(the beſt Stars i'th Firmament are mine | _”” "a Ort
- all The: Whts, -
Gur Conch attends us Knighti'th botzom of * Phe-hicher ſtreet, you muſt go bome alone, Thwack, Je ſooner Kill a Sergeant, chuſe my Jury In the City, and be hangd for a Tayern Buſh / El. Pal. Wilt ruine all our deſtinies hath built? T hy. Come, what are thoſe fly filk-worms there that cree $0 efoito their wooll, as they would ſpin For none bur their dear felves ; I heard 'em name a Ladic / ] Elder Pal.Nou heard them ſaythen, ſhe was young, and what I Our Covenants are, remember! 7hw. Young, how || Þ young ? She left her Wormſced, and her Corall whiſtle Bur a Moneth ſince : do they mean fo ? P Elder Pal. Xorglay, our Covenants is all I ask! | T hw. May be ſhe hath a mind to me, for there's I A reverend humor inthe blood, which thou A Nere knewſt; perhaps ſhe would have Boys begot Should be deliver'd wich long Beards, till thou T Arrive at my full growth, thow'lt yield the world | Nought above Dwarf, or Page. Ye Elder Pal. Our Covenants {till, I cry : Thwack, Faith, Ile ſtride my Mule to morrow, andy At awa Toth komely Village in the North! Z/4.Pal. Why ſol} Y Thwack. Alas, theſe ſilly Covenants ( you know) - | An I ſeal'd to in mydrink, and certain fears Yo Lurk ina remote corner of my head, | That ſay the game will all be yours, Mr E1d. Pal. Eut what. ſucceſs canit thou expe ſing} H® w have | In Noz yet enjoy'd the City a full day 2? Inſn T hw. | ſay, tet me have Woman !Be ſhe young Or old, Grandam or Babe, 1 mult haye Woman' =
F +
” by
The .YVits; 29: E14. Pal. Carry but thy patience: like a Guadendacſ) And let me ſingly mannage this advencure, 21 A Je. will roo morrovy cancel our old deeds, And leavethee to ſubſcribe to what thy free v\ 4 Pleaſure ſhall dire. Thw. Wee'l equzlly enjoy Virgin, Wife,and Widow, the younger Kerehiet wirh The aged Hood, E14. Pal. Whar I have ſaid, if Had leiſure now Ide ratifie with oaths of thy own chuſing. | Thw. Go! prop: gite! fill che ſhops wich 'thy notch Iſſue, thar when our Money's ſpent, we may + Be truſted, break, and cozznin onr own Tribe. E!. Pal. Leave me to fortune !' 7hw,D'you hear, Pal- latine. Perhaps this young Lady hrs a Mother [— 2 W Ed. Pallat. No more; good night /—Ex:it.7h wack. I have obey'd you Gentlemen, no Ears Are neer 1s, but.our own, What's your affair? Meas. Wee'l lead you to the Ladies Manſion; Sir, Tis hard by, E/4. Pal. Hard by1 Pert, So neer, thit if your Lungs'be good, You may ſpit chither chat is the houſe | E/4. Pal. Theſe appear Gentlemen, And of ſome rank: L will in / Exeanc EL Pal. Meager, Pert. Yo. Pal. So ſo ! the hook has c-ught him by the Gils\ | And it is faſtned to. a line will hold You Sir , though your wits were ſtronger then your purſe ! vir Aforglay T hwack's gone home /hiis lodging 1 Have learn'd,and there are certain Gins prepar'd' In which his wary feet may chance to. be L Inſnar'd , though he:could wear his: Eyes upon is Toes 1 | I muſt follow the game cloſe ! He is enter'd, And ere this amaz'd atthe ſtrange complexion | Gig: 5 ..Q#
30- The Wits, Of the houſe, bur, 'twas the beſt our friendſliip And ourtreaſure could procure. Exit. Eld.Pallatine, Meager, Pert,with Lights. A Gentlemen (if you pleaſe) lead me no fur. p
T have {© little faith to beleeve this, The Manſion ofa Lady, that I think "Tis rather the decays of hell; a fad Retirement for the Fiend, to ſleep in when Hee's fick with drinking Sulphure. Peyt. Sir you ſhall ſee this upper room is hung / EZ. Pal. With Cobwebs Sir, and thoſe fo large rhey
ma cet enſnare Dragons inſtead of Flies, Where {ira melancholly race of old Norman - that came in with'Conquerour. | Meag. This chamber will refreſh your eyes when you Have caufe to enter it,— Leads him tolook in 'rween rhe bangings. E]. Pallat. A Bed, and Canopy | Ther's ſhew of entertainment there indeed ; There Lovers may have place to celebrate
a i R2@#@£@4a io i i a.m
Their warm wiſhes, and not take cold : but Gentlemen, | , How comes the reſt of his blind bouſe ſo nak'd, So ruinous and deform'd ? Pext, Pray Sir fit down :
If you have ſeen ought ſtrange, or fir for wonder, p It but declares the haſty ſhifts, ro which I The poor diſtreſſed Lady is expos'd, ] In purſuit of your love. Shee hath good fame, ( Great dignity and wealth, and would be loth 7 To cheapen theſe by making her dull family & Bold witneſſes of her defires with you : N Therefore, Yavoid ſuſpition, to this place,
[ Slyath ſent part of her negle&ted Wardrobe. 1 Heag. Andwill ere time grows older by an hour, 4 Guild all this homely furniture ar charge
Pf her own Eyes; her beams can do it Siri Ela
xuvnl8
ts.
hey
EL. Pal. 'Twere pitty faith, ſhe ſhould be caſt away. | E pry Gich, he EE
The Wits, '3 E14. Pallat.My manners will not ſuffer me t6 done ; Pert. We hope ſo too : beſides, though evety one '
That hath a heart of's own, may think his pleature ,
We ſhould be oth, your rhoughts ſhould chrow mi-
ſtakes
On us, that are the humble Miniſters
Of your kind ſtars : for ſare, though we look not
Like men that make Plantation on fome Iſle
That's uninhabited, yet you believe
We would teach Sexes mingle to increaſe men !? Meag. Squires of the Placket, we know you think us.
Ela.Pall. Excuſe my courage Gentlemen! good faith I am not bold enough to think you fo.
Pert, Nor will you yer be woo'd to ſuch miſtake ?
E/d Pal. Notall the Arr, nor Flattery you have Can render you to my belief worſe than ——_ : Panders, and Bawds, good Gentlemen I ſhall be angry, if you perſwade me to So vile a thought ! Pexr. Sir you have cauſe !
And in good faith, if you ſhould think us ſuch, We would make bold to cut that ſlender throat. E/4. Pal. How Sir ?
Perr.Thar very throat, through which the luſtyGrape, And ſav ry Morſel in the Gameſtersdifh,
Steal down fo leafurely, with Kingly guſt !
Artag. Sir, it ſhould open wide,as th'wideſt Oyſter Pch Yenetian Lake! F1, Pal. Gentlemen, it ſhould * Itis a threat I can ſo little hide In ſuch a cauſe, that I would whet your Razor for't On my own ſhoo, Peyr. Enough ! you ſhall know all * This Lady hath a Noble mind but *tis So much o'remaſtred by her blood, we fear Nothing bur death, or you can be her remedy*
Eld. Pal. Andis ſhe young ?
Meag. O ! as the April Bud'
| $32 The Wits. - Per. You have a ſoft, and bleſſed heart, and to Prevent fo ſad a period of her ſweet breath :- Our ſelves, this houſe, the habit of chis room, The Bed within, and your fair perſon we ' Have all aſſembled ina rrice. E/d Pa/.Sure Gentlemen, In my opinion more could not be done , Were ſhe Jnberetrix of all the Eaſt Pere. Bur Sir, the excellence of your pure fame, Hith given us boldneſs to make fute, that if You can reclaim her appetite with chaſte 1 And wholfome Homilies, ſuch Counſel as | Fefits your known Morality, you will Be pleas'd to fave her life, and not undoe her honour ? AMeag. We hope you will afford her Medicine by Your meek and holy LeRures, rather than | From any manly exerciſe, for ſuch Introth Sir, you appear to our weak {1ght / bc E14. Pal. Brothers, and Friends, a ſtile more diſtant }. 1
now | Cannot be given : though you were in compals P, Thick, as the Aſpes, 1 mult embrace you. both— E,
Y have hicthe very Center, unto which the toils and comforts of my ſtudies tend.
Perr, Alas, wedrew our Arrow but by aim |!
E/d. Pal. Why Gentlemen 1 h2ve converted more Than ever Gold or Aretine miſled + ' 16) T've Diſciples of alt degrees in Nature From your little Punk in Purple, to your Tall Canvas Girl; from your Sattin Slipper Toyourlron Pattin, and your Norway Shooe !
Pert. And can you mollifte the mother Sir, ' Ina ſtrong fit. 'Ei. Pal. Sure Gentlemen 1 can. It Books penn'd with'a clean and wholſome ſpirit, : Iftr "Have any might to edifie ; would they XB3 h Were here, AJeag. What Sir? - Nos E/4. Pal. A ſmallLibfary. » / Which Iam wont to gaake companion to My
*%
The Wits, .. 22 My idle hours : where ſome ( I take it) are | Alitrle conſonant unto this Theame, Pert, Have they not names? £14. Pall. A Pillto purge phlybotomy ! a Balſamum forthe ſpiritual back / a Lozenge againſt luſt ; Vich divers other Sir, which though not penn'd By dull Platonjck Greeks, or Memphian Prieſts, et have the bleſſed marke of ſeparation Of Authors filenc'd, for wearing ſhort hair, Pert, But Sir, if this chaſte meanes cannot reſtore  ! rto her health and quiet peace , I hope You will vouchſafe your Lodgingin yon Bed, * ? Fndcakea line pains— Punts to the Bed within, Ed. Pall. Faith Gentlemen, I was ot bred on ScythianRocks; Tygers and Wolves 've beard of, bur nere ſuck dtheir milk, and ſure uch would be done to ſave a Ladies longing! nt |} Meag. Tis late Sir, pray uncaſe /— | T hey help to uncleath him, Pert; Your Boot, believ't, it is my exerciſe / . Eld: Pall, Well ; tis your turn to Jabour now, and mine n, for your dear ſakes Gentlemen, I profeſs —- Pert. My friend ſhall wait upon you to your ſheets, hilſt I goe and conduR the Lady hither : bom i your holy doQtine cannot well daim, pray hazard not her life , you have y Sir  E14d. Pall. O! think me not cruell/ Ex. Meag. Eld. Pal, Emer To: Pallatine. P:yt. Pall, come in Pall! To: Pall.1s.he in Bed? Pext. Nat yer, | ſtripping in more baſte, than an old ſnake hopes for a new sKin / | Fe: Pall. If wecould _ x Coffin Perr, this would be a jealt
My
Long
-
The Wits, Longafter death : hee is ſo capet in — - His witty hopes, that he ſ nothing, Peyt. O all he ſwallows Sir is melting Conferye, And foft Prdran Plan! Meager what news ? | Enter Meagn Meap. Layd ! gently layd ! heis all Virgin ſure, From the crown of's Head, to his yery. Navel ! To: Pall. Where are his Breeches ? ſpeak ! his Hat- band too / Tis6f grand price, the ſtonesare Roſiall, and Of the white Rock ! May. I bung'm purpoſely þ Aſide, th'are all within my reach: ſhalll in ? a To: Pall. Soft! ſoftly my falſe fiend ! remember F Rogue ; You tread on Glaſſes, Egges, and gowty Toes ! HMeager takes ont his Hat and Breeches, the Pocki Hatband rifled, they throwy'm in agen.
x ww Dc
F
[ =
Meer, Hold Pal/*rh'Exchequer is thine own ! of / | -- will Divide, when thou artgracions and well pleas'd! - To: Pall. AN Gold ! the Statls of Lombard-ftret FE powr'dinto a purſe. p | Pet. Em Pall, are thy Brothers good! 1 To: Pall. Yes, and his proud Flocks;, but you ſe 4 what the wm Cometo? alittle room contains them all , Aclaſt ; fo, fo, convay them in again ! We Becauſe he is my Elder Brother ! & = My Mothers Mayden-bead, and a Country Wit, | ” HeThafinot be expoſed to bare thighes, and a ©" Bald Crown ! what noyſe is that > — knocking wil, 21 Pert, Death ! there's old Fnore ( looks at if
Pryor gn wife, a wer wor greed Halberds, iſtreſle Queabe too, the L y Thatowns thx houſe PEI
The Wits, IF Meag. Belike tave heard our friend | The Bawd, fled hencelaſt night : and now they come To ceaze on Mooveables for rent !
Young Pall. The Bed within, and th Hangings that very wehyr'd,
"> {Tofurniſh our deſign, are all condemn'd,
My brother too , theyle.uſe him with as thin
Hate Remordſe, as an old Gameſter would an Aldermans Heire /
Perr. No matter, our adventure's paid ! follow
j 1and'Helead you a back way where you
hall climbe ore tiles, like Cats when they make love.
Tong. Pall. Now I ſhall laugh at thoſe, chat heapup wealch
ly 1azie method, and ſlow rules of Thrift ; "oY grown the Child of Wir, and canadyance ly ſelf, by being Votary to chance. Exeunt:
\ ACT, 3. SCEN., 1, frre|ryccr nore, Miſtreſs Snore, Dueaſie, and Watchmen,
n!
ood Miſt. $nore. Dayes o'my breath, I have not ſeen the like /
'00"TWhat would you have my husband doe ? *tis paſt tc by Boe, and the Bell-man has gone twice ! Aueaſie. Good Maſter Sore, you are the Conſtable, du maydoe ir ( as they ſay ) be it right or wrong!
. » four years rent, come Childermas Eve next !
by Snore, Youſee Neighbour Peaſe the Doores are
X n; x Bot; _ goods, no Bawde left ; I'd ſee the Bawde! kg 4% it. Snore. 1 or the Whores; my husband's the i ſtill rakes care I warrant yee of Ba
wds 5 ,u& Whores! Shew him but a Whore ar thistime Op
-
26 The Wits, O” night ( Good man) you bring bima bed i* faich ! Dneafie, 1. pray Miſtreſs Snore let him ſearch the Pariſh They are not gone far, I muſt have my rent, I hope there are Whores, and Bawds1n the Pariſh / Xiſft. Snore. Search now? itis to0 late , a womat had As good marry a Cowleſtaffe as a Conſtable , If he muſt nothing bur ſearch and ſearch, follow His Whores, and Bawds all day, and never comfort His Wife at night : Iprethee Lambe let us to Bed ! Fnore.” It mult be late ; for Goſlip Nockthe Na man Has catechys'd his Maids, and ſung three Catches, Anda Song, ere we fet forth! © Dneafie, Good Miſt. Snore, forbear your husb buc
| ] ] ; |
u To night , and let the ſearch go on ? Hiſt. Snore. Twill not forbear;” you might ha' your houſe To honeſt Women, not to Bawds ! fie upon you ! Dncaſfie, Fie upon me ! tis well known I'm the mother | Of Children ! Scirvie Fleak ! tis not for nought You boyle Eggs in your Gruel, and your man Samp{] t: Owes my Sonne in law, the Surgeon, Ten groats For Turpentine ; which you have promis dto pay Our of his Chriſtmaſle Box. 115. Snare. Idehe t Remember thy firſt calling, thou ſetſt up Witha Peek of Damſens, and a new five ; | When thou broakſt at Dowgate corner, *cauſe the Flang downthy ware 1 * * Fmore. Keep the peace, Wife / keep the peace ! | \ Miſt. Snore. 1 will not peace : ſhe took my filveq 2 Thimble 41 To pawa when I wasa Maid; I paid ber
Tx _ Th: Wits, | 37 Apenny a monech uſe | Queaſfie. A Maid? yes ſure ;, By that token, goody Tongae the Midwife, 5
h the] Had a dozen Napkins 0 your Mothers beſt
Diaper, to keep lilence ; when ſhe ſaid
the lefr you atjSaint Peters Faire, where you
|! JLongd for Pigge/
omat} Sore, Neighbour eaſe, this was not
In my time : what my Wite hath done, fince]
Was Conſtable, and the Kings Officer,
lle anſwer : therefore ( 1 ſay \ Fw the peace !
fort [And ara whe ſearch'd theqwo back rooms, lle to
[! |
NaylePeace Wife ! not a word * E xeunt
Enter Eld. Pallatine clothing himſelf in haſte
E1d. Pallar. Tis time to get on wings, and fly }
Here's a noyſe of Thunder, Wolves, Women,
usbanFAll that's confus'd, and frights the care! I heard
Them cry out Bawds | the ſweet young Lady is Surpris'd ſure, by the nice ſlave her husband ;
' ha' Or ſomeold Folly Matron of neere kinne ,
And the good Gentlemen ſh' employd to me
a! Jare tortur'd and call'd Bawds ! if Lam tane,
m theſjle ſwear, I purpos'd her converfion—
Enter Snore, Miſt. Snore, Ducafie, and Watchmen,
Snore, Here's a Room hung, anda faire Bed within,
Sampſi1 take it, there's the hee-Bawd too.
ts Dneaſie. Cenze on the lewd thing
3y | [pray Maſter Snore, ceaze on the goods too !
ie the} 145. Snore. Who would not bea Bawd ? thayg
propper men {To their husbands ; and ſhe maintains him rhe BoſLike any pariſh-Deputy. Eld. Pall. Whatare you ?
ice ! | Smnore, 1 am the Conſtable, |
y filveq E1d. Pall. Good, the Conſtable ?
| 1begin to ſtroke mylong ears, and find
5,
Tam
4 The Wits, © Laman Af | ficha dull Afſe, as deſerves
Thiſtles for provender, and fawduſtroo
Initeed of Graines! O1 am finely gull'd.
Miſt. Snore. Traly as propper a Bawd, as a woman Would defire touſe ? E14. Pall. Maſter Conſtable, - Though theſe - age Squires oth Bladeand Bill, ſeem to Be courteous Gentlemen, and well caughe, yer 1 would know, why they embrace me? ({( years rent,
Snore. You owe my neighbor ( Afiſt. Pueaſic ) four
eaſe Yes and for three Bed Teekes and a Braſs Which your Wife : (0 ve mie to pay this Terme, (pot; For now (ſhe ſaid ) ſh'expeRs ber country Cuſtomers
El. Pall. My Wife | have Tbeen led to'th Altar too; By ſome doughty Deacon, tane woman by The pretty chumb, and giving her a Ring Wirh my dear ſetf/ for better and for worſe And allin a forgotten dream ? But for whom Doe youtake me ? Smore. For the he Bawd.
Eld. Pall. Good faith, you may as ſoon,
Take me for a Whale, which is ſomething rare You know, o'this ſide the Bridge,
Miff. Smore. Tis irfdeed !
Yet your Pax/ was in the belly of one, | In my Lord Maiors Shew , and husband you remember, He beckned you out of the Fiſhes mouth,
And you gave him a Pepin, for the poor ſoul
Had like have choak'd , for verythirſt,
E1d, Pall. Ifawi it, andery'd out Oh City, cauſe they would not be at charge To let the Fiſh ſwim in a deeper Sea ! (then
Miſt. Snore. Indeed ; why I was but a tiny Girle I pray how long have you beena Bawd here ?
E14. Pall. Againe | how the Devill,
AmlI chang'd, ſince my own Glafs rendred mo
A Gentleman +; well, maſter Conſtable,
Though ev'ry Stal's your Worſhips wooden Throne, - ; | | Here!
ArADILE CDM RMHo]]}]7?7OAJAAYLXIIÞFEPES.C.
Xr,
Here you are humble, ando'foot ; therefore;* L 1 will put on my Hatt; ; prayreach it me} — aniſſes fig. Death ! my hat and! a row of Diamonds _—_
ThteWits, | © 39:
Worth athouſand Markes!Nay itis time then( Hathord
To doubt and tremble too .My Goldimy boxer hg veer
And precious ſtones ! his Pockets. Mi#. $nore. Doe youſulpeR my Hushand  ' -
He hath no need o'your ſtones, I prayſe heaven !--
Eld. Pall. A plague upoR your courteous midnight Good filly Saints, they are dividing now, { Leaders:1' And miniſtring ( 'nodoubt ) unto the poore !
This will decline the reputation of
My Witt, till I bethought to have aleſs head
Then a Juſtice o'Peace ! If Morglay hear's, '
He'le think me dull, as a Dutch Marriner !
Nomed'cine now from thought ? Good !'tis deſign'd #
Sno, Come along | tis late,
Eld, Pall. Whither muſt I ew
Dneaſp ce. To the Compter (ar,unleſs my rent be _
Sor. And for being a Bawde !
Eld, Pali, Contin'd in Wainſcot Walls too,
Like a licoriſh Rat, for niblin
Unlawfully upon forbidden Cheeſe! 2:
This to the other ſawce, is Alloegand Mirrh ! | But Maſter Conſtable doe you behold this Ring? '
Kis worth ali rhe Bells in your Church ſteeple, _ - Though your Sexton, and Side-men hung ihere too,
To better the Peale. Sor. Well what's your requeſt ?
El. Pall. Mary, that you will let me goe tofewh.” The Bawd, the very Bawd, that owes this rent,
Who being quam ſhall IG Ring;
And believe mee tobe anarrant Gentleman,
Such as in*s Scutchion gives Horns Hounds and Hawks, Hunting Nags, with tall Eatersin Blew Coats, oft Sance Number! Qxes. Hop lathe gredhle Ges
46S - "The | Wits. Wee ſtay and keep the goods ! MiR. $nor. Yes, let tim Husband. For I would fainiee a very hee Bawd / - Sr. Come Neighbours, light him on: ! = Exemit. . 2 Emer To: Pall, Amp. Pert, Luce, Ginet, Engine, F with lights. Ampl, A Forreſt full of Palms; thy Lover ( Z#ce) Merits in Girlandsfof. his vitory. Pm wild with joy! why there was wit enough Inthis deſign to bring a Ship of fools To ſhore agen, and make them all good Pilots ! To: Pallats Madam,this Gentleman deſerves to ſhate In your kind praiſe, he was a merry Agent In the wholeplot; and would exalc himſelf Toyour Ladiſhips fervice : If you pleafe For my humble ſake, unto your Liptoo !—Pert ſalutes. Amp.. Sir you are friend to Palatine, ber And thatentitles you unto much worth. !- Pext, Thetitle will be berrer'd { Madam ) when I am become a Servant to your beauty. © <., Lucy. Why your confederate Pex, is courtly t90 ; Hee will out-tongue a Favourite of Framce! * But didſt thou leavethy Brother furferting | On lewd hopes? To:'P all. He believes all woman kind Dreſs'dand ordain'd for th'mercy of his Tooth ! | Amp. And now lies {tretch'd in his ſmooth ſlipperie
E ſheets / | The
* Tor Pall. Olike, a wanton Snake on Camomile! And rifled to ſo fad remains of wealth, Hiſt
That if his reſolution fill difdam Suppliment from his Lands, and he reſolve To live here by his Wits, he will ere long himſelf ro Raddith womenfor , heir roots, pledge Children in their fucking Bottles; ee; Andin dark winter-Mornings, rob.ſmall
| | 6 Ofrheir Honey, and their Bread ! do
Or To Ou!
|-boy
P
. : im
The Wits. | #2 Peyr. Faich, AZeager and T, u'sd him with as much Remorlſe, as our occaſions could allow ;  Þ 'Lafs, he miilt think we ſhreds of time wt. Have our occaſions too! | | To. Pal. What ( Mad:m) need he cafe 3 For, let him but prove kind unto his Bulls, ce) Þ Bring them their Heifers when their Creſts are high”; Stroak his fair Ewes, and pimp a little for His Rams, they ſtrait will multiply ; and then The next great Faif, prepares him firagen, | For cf Cities view, ard our ſurprize. hate 8 41mpl. Why this young Gentletian hath reliſhin't © Yet when you dadeMNang the dark, and deep | Contrivements, which my ſelf, Engine, and Luce, Have laid for this great, witty Vilager. To whom you bow as formoſt of your blood You will degrade your ſelves from all prerogatives, Above our Sex, and all thoſe pretty Marks Of Manhood (yourtrim beards)ſindg off with Tapers, - As a juſt Sacrifice to our Supremacy. 090 ; JN. Lace. If Sit Tirant Thrift, your Phlegmatick Guet» Leave but this Manſion onts till the next Sun, (dian eel make your haughty brother tremble ar ename of Woman, and bluſh behinde a Fan \ WLike a yawning Bride, that hath foul Teeth ! | | Engine, Madam, *tis time you were a Bed;for ſure be- Whe earneſt invitation which I left ( tide 'ritin his Chartber, thefe afflitions will Wiſlturb his reſt, and bring him early hither orecover his ſick hopes — Enter Meager. _ To: Pal. Meager | What news ? Madan, the homage our Lipagen, A man 0? War believ't, (of -*Pne that hath faſted irrthe face of's foe; ttles; Yeen Spino/a entrench'd ; ſomerimes hath ſpread |-DOYSFG Butter at the State's charge; ſometimes too , «ona Salladthat hath grown upon nn BY
lates
le!
Ti
<2 The Wits, The Enemies own Land ; but, pardon me, Without or Oyl, or Vinegar ! Ample.Sir, Men in choler may do any thing,
Meager, Your Ladiſhip will excuſe his new plenty, It hath made bim, pleaſant.
Ye. Pall, Meag. What news:how do our Spies proſper!
wee £4 Sir, rare diſcoyeries ! I've trac'd your Bro
raer ; You ſhall hear more anon :
Ginet, Your Ladiſhip forgets how early your Defigns will waken you ? Engine. Madam,1I'de fain be Bold too, to haſten you unto your relt -
emp. Tis late (indeed) the hlence of the Night And licep be with you Gentlemen; Exexnt, Ample,
net, Engines
To Pal. Madam, good night; but our heads never we Ordain'd to ſo much trivial leaſure as Toſleep; you may as ſoon entreat A Secxtan ſleep in's Bellfry when the Plague reigns; 'An aged Sinner in a Tempeſt, or A jealousStateE-man when his Prince is dying,
Lace. Pray diſmiſs your friends, I would ſpeak wi
you. Yo. Pal. Men o'the puiſſant Pike follow the lights, Exeant Meager, Þ Lace.Pall, You are :s good natur'd to me Pall, - As the wife of a filenc'd Miniſter, Is to a Monarchy, or to lewd Gallants, ln That haveloſt a Noſe ! Yo: Pal: And why ſo, Dag. Lace ? | | . Lace. So many yellow Images at once per in naptes and Jewels too y price, all this free boo » In lawful _— and I no tribute Pale $i T7": Pal. What need it, Lace? a Virgin may live cheaf Ttrare maintaincd with as ſmall charge as a Wren }! With Magots in a Cheeſmongers Shop? Y
u x A.
The Wits, 42 Lace. Well Pa/l, and yet you know all my exfreams? How for a little Taffara to line s A Mask, I'm fainco mollifie my Mercer ity; | Wirth a ſoft whiſper, and a tim'rous bluſh, ©
To ſigh unto my Millener for Gloves ; ſper'F That chey may truſt, and not complainunto my Aunt; " Bro Who is as jealous of me as their wives, and all Through youdemeanour Pall; whoſe kindneſs I Perceive, will raiſe meto ſuch dignirie, That I muſt teach Children in a dark Cellar, Or work Coifs in a Garret for crackt Groats, And broken meat ! Yo. Pal, Lace,l will give thee Lace,”
to buy Lace. What Pal ?
Yo: Pal. An ounce of Arſaick to mix inthy Aunts Cau- This Aunt, I mult ſee cold, and grinning, Lace, (dels, r welSeal'd to her laſt winke, as if ſhe pm age.
'avoid the ſighr of Feathers, Coaches , and fhort
Lxce. How many Angels of your Family (Cloaks , rethere in heaven? but few I fear, and how,
ou'l be the firſt, that ſhall intitle chem Wo ſuch high calling, is rome adoubr / ak will 70. Pal. Why is there never a Pue there (Lace) but for our coughing Aunt, and you ? Lace, Hadſt thou eyes like flaming Beacons, crook'd MW tail three yards long, and thy feet cloven, ( horns, hou couldſt not be more a Fiend, then thou art now , Jut to advance thy fins with being hard , Ind coſtive unto me ! | all To. Pal. Youlie Lace,you lie! —= Fliags her a Parſe, Fher's Gold / the Fairiesare thy Mintmen Girl, Pfchis thou ſhalt have ſtore enough, to make
tie hungry Academicks mention thee, LEvening LeRtures, with applauſe, and prayer : Foundreſs thou ſhaltbe. Lace. Of Hoſpitals, =_ decayed ſelf, Mſeager, and Pere,
- 5 Ws friends, 2
n be
ht le,
ons 3
OD
To, Pal,
The. Wits,
To:PaPA Nunn'ry Lzce,where all the female Iſlue Of our decay'd Nobility ſhall live Thy Penlioners : it will preſerve them from Such want, as makes them quarter Arms with th'City, And match with ſaucie Haberdaſhers Sons, ; Whoſe Fathers liv'd in Allies, and dark Lanes !
Lace. Good night Pat!. your gold le lay up, though Teencounter the next Surgeons Bill, yet know . ( but Our Wits are ploughing roo, and in a ground That yields as fair a grain: as this! p
To. Pal. Farewel, and let me hear thy Aunt is ſtuck YT With more Bay-leaves and Roſemary, than a R Weltphalia Gammon. Exemnt. C
Sh Tt
- Emter E/d. Pallatine; and Thwack_ areſſing himſelf. { E44 Pal. Quick, diſpatch Knight / thou art as tedi- ous-in Thy drefling, as a Court Bride , two Ships might W Be rigg'd for che Straits, in leſs ſpace than thou Carreen'ſt that ame old Hulk , can it be thought That one ſo filld with hope and wiſe deſigns Could be ſubdu'd'with fleep, what dull, and drowſie? Keepearlier hours than a rooſt Henin Winter ? Thwack, Pallatine, the deſign grew all Dream , M: gick , And Alchymie tome I gaveit loſt! Clove to my ſoft Pillow, like a warm Juſtice, And lep: there with leſs noiſe than a dead Lawyer In a Monument, E/d.Pal. This is the houſe; diſpatch,that T may kno Thwack. Slight ſtay,thou think'ſt I've the dexterity Of a Spaniel, that with a yawn, a ſcratch On his left ear, and ſtretching his hind-legs, ie h Is ready for all day ;O for the Biſcayn fleeve, ay f And Bulloign hoſe, I wore when I was ſhrieve, or « In eighty eight ! B/4.Pal. Faith thou art. comly KnightF >, AndI already ſee the Town Girles melt, he di , Ar
, Ic or
ſh E l t Thn
- af a 4.
The VP its..' 45. -. And thaw before thee. -7hwack, We muſt be'content ! Thou know'lt all menrare bound to wear their limbs th ſame skin that Nature beſtows upon them Beir rough, or bet ſmooth; for my parr, If ſhe to whom you lead me now like nor The grain of mine, I will not flea my ſelf, 18h F Thumor the touch of her Ladiſhips fingers 1 but BY Ed. Pal. Well, I had chought t have carried it with Youth, But when 1 came to greet her beauties with > JTheeyes of love and wonder, ſhe deſpis d me, Rebuk'd thoſe haughty Squires, her Servants that - Conyei d me thicher in miſtake, and cry'd, f. She meantthe more Authentick Gentleman, teu-YThe rev'rend Mounſier, ſhee! Thwack, The reyrend Mounſier ? Why,does ſhe take me for a French Dean? E14. Pal. Her Conteſlor ar leaſt, her ſecrets are l dine own , but by what charms atcain'd , Let him determine that his read Agrippa.
Thw, Charms?yes Sir,if this bea Charm—or this-— Or here again t'advance th' aRtivity (leaps and fricks. FROf a poor old back / E/d. Pal. No Ape, Sir Morglay, After a years obedience to the Whip,
s better quallify'd! Thw. Limber, and ſound Sir ! beſides, I ſing, little 2ſuſgrove, and then er For the Chevie Chaſe no Lark comes neer me :
ſhe be Cane with cheſe, why at her peril bee't. . 'Eld. Pall. Come Sir, diſpatch ! te knock, for here's the houſe,
Thwack, Stay, ſtay, this Lane (ſure) has no great re- be houſe too, if the Moon reveal aright, (nown! ay for its ſma!! Magnificence be left
or ought we know) out of the Citie-Map. | Eld. Pall. Therein conſiſts the Miracle, and when
ie doors ſhall ope, and thou behold, how leag '-
D 3
1e?
46 The Wits, And ragped ev'ry room a .tif! thou
Haſt reach'd the Sphere, where ſhe (!llvftrious) moves. Thy wonder will be more perplex'd; for know
This Manſion is not hers, but a concealF'd
Retirement, which her wiſdome ſafely choſe
To hide her looſe love.
Thwack, Give me a Baggage that has brains! but Pat Did not I at firſt perſwade thee, thoſe wo ( /zrine, Trim Gentlemen, her Squires might happily Miſtake the perſon unto whom the meſſage was Diſpos'd ; and that my felf was he ?
E/. Pal. ThoudidR ! and thou haſt got ( Knight ) by || |
this hand | I think, the Afeguls Neece, ſhe cannot be | Of leſs deſcent, the heighr and ſtrangeneſs of T Her port, denote her forreign, and of great blood, pI Thwack, What ſhould the Moguls Neece do here ? 'F .} El4. Pal. *Las thy Ears are buried ina Wool-ſack ?
Thou hear*ſt no News?'tis all the voice in Court, le That ſhe is ſent hither in diſguiſe, to-learn Fy To play onthe Gitarh, and make Almond Butter |! | But whether this great Lady chart I bring On Thee to, be ſhee , is yet not quite confirm'd ! =
Thwack. Thou talk't o th high, and ſtrange cor Fol
rtment that Thou found'ſt her in ! |
El4. Pal. Night Sir! ſhe ſat ona rich Perftan Quilt ,
Thridding a Carckaner, of pure round Pearl, Bigper then Pigeons Eggs ; Thwack, Thoſe I will ſel E1d. Pall, Her maids with little rods of Roſemarie, And ſtalks of Lavander, were bruſhing Ermines skins; T hw. Furs for the Winter, Ile litie my Breeches wit them ! wa Pal. Her young ſmooth Pages lay, round at In
cet, | Cloath'dlike the Sophics Sons, and all arDice ; TheCaſter lix Wedges x Cubir long. .
* c « 52] 4)
The Wits, C 47
Cries one; another comesa Tun of Piſtolets
Andrhen is cover'd with an Argolie ,
Laden with J-aico; and Cxrchymill !
Thwack This muſt be the great Afognls Neece!
E14. Pal. As for her Grooms, they all were planted
Their knees, carowſing their great Ladie's healch (on
In perfum'd Wines, ard then itraight quallify'd
; Their wild, voluptuous heats with cool Cerber,
ne, | The Turks own Julip> Thw, Knock, Pallatine !
Quick Rogue !I cannot hold ; little thought I The Thwack's of the North, ſhould inoculate With the 2ogal's of the South! —- Palatine knecks. } by Enter Snore.
E14. Pal. Speak ſoftly Maſter Conſtable, Pve brought The very he Bawd | Smore. Bleſſing pn your hearr, Sir : My Warch are above at Trea Trip, for a Black Pudding, and a pound 0* S»ffc/h Cheeſe ,
They'l ha-done ſtraight : Pray fetch him to me,
lle call them down, and lead him to a by-room.
: Thw. Pallatine,what's he ? EJ.Pal.The Ladie's ſteward A fage Philoſopher and a grave Pandar ! (Sir, One chat hath writ bawd Sonnets in Hebrew,
And thoſe ſo well, that if che Rabbins were
Alive, *tis thought he would corrupt their Wives. Ffollow me Knight :>— Thw, Pallatine ,
Half the large Treaſure that I get, is yours.
It {| £/4. Pal. Good faith (my triend) when you are onee ' poſleſs'd
11 ferf$Of all, *ris as your Conſcience will vouchſafe.
Thwack, Do'ſt thou ſaſpeR? Ile ſtay here till thog
Bible, and a Cuſhion, and ſwear kneeling, (ferch,
E/4. Pa}. My faith ſhall rather cozen me; walk in
With this Philoſopher —- No words : for hee's
\ Pychagorean, and profeſles (ilence.
${y Ring Maſter Conſtable--- Smore gives him his
© ( Ring, then Exit with Thwack:
D 4 Here
-
| The Wits, Here yet my Reputation's ſafe ! ſhould, he Have Neard of my miſchance, and-not accompany'd With this defeat upon himſelf, his Mirth © And Tyranny had been 'bove hamane ſufferance ! Kow for the Lady Ample, ſhe (I gueſle) Looks on me with ſtrong fervent Eyes; ſhee's rich , ' And could 1 work her into profit, 'twould Procure my Wit, immortall memory ; But to be gull'd? and by ſuch Trifles too , Dull, humble Gentlemen that ne're drunk Wine, But on ſome Coromation day, when each Conduit piſſes Claret at the Town charge ! Well, though 'tis worſe than Steel or Marble to Digeſt; yerT have learn d, one ſtop in'a Career, taints not# Rider with diſgrace ; But may procure hhm breath to win the race. Exit.
AC T4 SCEN. 1.
«+: Enter To: Palatine, Engine. AMeager, Pert, Palla- tine richly cloath'd. |
Ezgin. Your Brother'sin the houſe, the Letter which I ſent to tempt him hither wrought above | The reach of our deſires , My Lady Sir, He does beleeve, is ſick to death, and all In Janguiſhment for his dear love, * Tv: Pall. Pert , and Meager , though you have both go0d faces, EG They muſt not be ſeen, there is below , A-Brother o'mine ; whom (I take it ) you Have us'd not over tenderly. Aeag. S'light he muſt needs remember us! Pert. Wee'l ſooner ſtay tout-face a Baſilisk! Whither ſhall we go? | +Fo: Pal.-To Snore the Conſtable : Morglay is ſtill A Pris*ner in his houſe ; take order for's © _OTRE ee, Releaſe,
4 : 4 T5: : | > : T%- 3 F- | ' 'Þ ſ k
* 64 f*: 7
| (UM
: The Wits, ._ leaſe, asI projected, but ( d'you heare ) ee muſt nox free himrill I come, | Pert. Pall. will the dull Ruler of the night { Pal?) To: Pall: His wife will, and ſhe's his Conſtable ! ame mee bur to her, and ſhe does homage ! Meag. Enough, wee will attend thee there ! Engin. This way Gentlemen. Exeunt Engine, + "nj ( Pert, Meager..
49.
Enter Elder Pallatine. Eld; Pal What's this, an apparition, a Ghoſt ims broider'd ? . | Sure he has got the Devill for his Taylor. | 70: Pal. Good morrow Brother, Morrow ! Eld. Pal. Youare in glory fir, I like this flouriſhing _ t. le Lilly coo, looks handſome for a Month : But yot (T hope ) will laſt out the whole year / To: Pall W hat flouriſhing ! O Sir, belike you mean Ny Cloathes , thrare Raggs, coarſe homely Raggs, belecy'r 4 | etthey will ſerve for th*Winter fir, when I ich Ride poſt in Suſſex ways ! Eld Pal. This gayetie denotes Some ſolitary treaſure inthe Pocker, ind ſo you may become a lender too , ſou know, I'm far from home ! oth | To: Pal. Vie lend nothing, but good Counſel, and: | Wit, | Eld. Pal. Why ſure, you have no Factors fir,in Delph Lyghorne, Aleppo, or th Venetian Iles, hat by their Traffique canadvance you thus, or doe you trade i'th City by retaile 1 otir ſmall Wares : All that you get by Law, but a doleful Execution * + er Arreſt , and for your powerin Court, ow your ſtockings being on, you are
caſe,
505 The Wits, Admitted in the Preſence. To: Pal. What does this inferr Brother? Men of defign are chary of their Minutes, Be quick and ſubtile! | Ell. Pal. TheInfrence is You proſper by my documents, and what You have atchiey'd muſt be by your good Wits ! To: Pal. If youhad had a $ybi/to your Nurſe, You could not ( Sir ) haye aym'd neerer the truth, I ſaw your Ears and Bagps, were ſhut to all Intents of bounty ; therefore was inforc'd Into this way ;, and *twas at firſt ſomewhat
ainſt my Conſcience too !
Elder Pal. Tfnot to vex The zealous ſpiritin you, I would know why ?.
To: Pal. faith I've ſearch'd Records, at
| cannot find That Magna Charta does allow a SubjeRt To live by his Wits: there is no'Statute for't !
E14. Pal. Your Common Lawyer was no Antiquaryf,,
To: Pal. And then ( credit me Sir ) the Canons of The Church authorize no ſuch thing :
E14. Pal: ou have met with a dull Civilian too !
To. Pal. YetBrother, theſe impediments carinot Choke up my way; I muſt till on! |  (heiraf
Eld. Pal. And you believe the Stories of young Enforc'd to ſign at Mid-night to appeaſe The Sword Mans wrath, may be out-done by you! |
To: Pal. 1 were unkind elſe, ro my own good parts 1, .,.
Eld: Pal. And that your Wit has power to tempifrþ,.; a
from the
Severe, graveBench, the Aldermen themſelves,
To rifle where you pleaſe; for Skarfs, Feathers, 'And for Race-Nags :. |
To: Pal. Iris believ'd Sir, ina trice !
-" E/d. Pal. Andthat your wit can lead our rey'ret Matrons, F.C. -- nes
«H F- : [t
The Wits, | T6 id teſty Widows of fourſcoure, to ſeale | And in their ſmocks ) for fraile commodities otlevate your Punke ? | To: Pal. All this Sir, is fo eafie, y Faith woulc wallow'r, thoughrhad a ſore throat! Eld. Pal. Give me thy hand ! This day Ile cut off the entaile | Nall my Lands, and diſ-inherit thee ! To: Pal. Will you Sir? I thanke yee! Eld. Pal. But marke me Brother, for there's Ju- ſticein'r, | dmits of no reproof ; what ſhould you doe F ith Land, that have a Portion in your Brain, boveall Legacies or heritage? Yo: Pal I conceive you ! £14. Pal. Oro live here, i'th fair Metropolis our great Iſle, a free Inhericor Df ev'ry modeſt, or voluptuons wiſh, by young defires can breathe , and not oblig'd Woh Plough-mans toyl:, or lazie Rexpers ſwet; o make the world rby Farm, and every Man, | es witty than chy felf, T enantfor life , heſe are the glories thatproclaim a true hiloſophie, and Soul, in him that climbes Wo reach them with negle& of Fame and Life ! Yo: Pal. He carries it bravely! As he had felt othing thar firs his own remorſe , but know, Pir Eagle, th'bigher thar you flye, the leſs 5 Fou will appear to us, dimfighted Fowle, What flutter here below, Brother farewell ! | They ſay, the Lady of this houſe, groans for Your love, the tame fick fool is rich ; let not our pride beguile your profit! . : Exit Eld. Pal. 1 ſuſpet him ! Not alfthe $killI haye Reaſon or in Nature can pronounce | Slim free from the defeat upon my Gold,
And
53 _ The Wits,
And Jewels! *twaslike a Brother ! but for His two Confederates; though I ſhould meet Themina Miſt, darker than Night or Southern Fens Þ# Produce, my cies would be ſo courteous ſure, Tolet me know them ! Enter Ample, carried in as ſick, i1 a Conch, Luce, Engine, Ginet. Engin, Room | More ayre !if heay'nly Miniſters Have leaſure to conſider or aſſiſt The beſt of Ladies, let them ſhew.icnow /! — Luce. How do you Madam ? Oh, I ſhall loſe The chief example of internal love _. ace, and feature, thatthe world Did ever fhew to dignifie our Sex ? did e Exg. Work on / | muſt ſtand Sentinel beneath! Exylave E14. Pal. Is her diſeaſe grown up to ſuch extremityÞemp Then itis time, I ſeem to ſuffer too ; heir Or elſe my hopes will prove ſicker than ſhee ! Li Luce. More cruel than the Panther on his prey ! Why ſpeak you not? no comfort from your Lips
You Sir that are the cauſe of this ſad hower / Gin, Gin. Heſtands as if his Legs had taken root , nig] A very Mandrake / | Am
Eld. _ How comes it ( Lady ) all theſe Beautief Luc
l But yeſterday did ſeem to teach The Spring to flouriſh and rejoyce, ſo ſoon Are wither'd from our {ight. Ampl. 1tis in yain, t'inquire the reaſon of That grief, whoſe remedy is paſt, had you But felc ſo much remorſe, or ſoftneſs in Your heart, as would have made you nobly jult, -* Aad pitiful ; the Mourners of this day Had wanted then, their Dead to weep upon' bur be E1d. Pal. Am1 the cauſe? forbid it gentle heavensFall b The Virgins of ourLand, when this is xold, ecpin
The Wits,” £1 ill raze the Monumental building, where y buried fleſh ſhall dwell, and throw my duſt  Wcfore the ſportive winde , till T am blown about in parcels leſs thenEye-ſight can Wiſcern !
Lace. She liſtens to you ſir? |
E14. Pal. 1t Tam guilty of negle ;
ive me a talite of dutie, name how far ſhall ſubmit to love /! the mind hath no Diſcale above recovery, if wee
ze courage to remove _ !
Ampl. O Sir, the pride and ſcorns, with which you frſt
did entertain my paſſions, and regard, xiFave worn my eaſfie heart away ; my breaſt iry$emprier then mine Eies; that have diſtill'd
heir Balls tro Funeral Dew / It is too late ? Lace. Ginet, my feares have in them too much ! Prophecie, told thee ſhe would nere recover Ginet, For my poor part, I wiſh no eaſierBed night, then the cold grave where ſhe mult lie ! Amp. Luce, Luce | intreat the Gentleman to fic ! utie} Luce. Sit neer her, fir ! You hear her voyce grows weak! _ Ampl. That you may ſee your ſcorns could not per- ſwade _ ; By love, to thoughts of. anger or revenge , te faint remainder of my breath, Ile waſte Legacies; and Sir to you, you ſhall ave all the Laws will ſuffer me to give ! Ed. Pal. Who, 1 ? ſweet Saint, take heed of your laſtDeeds! | | bur bounty carriescunning Murder in't; ensFtall be kill'd with kindneſs, and depart Jeping, like a fand Infant, whom the Nurſe
y
Would
54 The Wits, Would ſooth, tooearly to his bed ! Luce. Nay Six, ne remedy, you mult have all : Though you procur'd her deach ; the world ſhall not Report; ſhe dy'd beholding to you ! Giner, Goe to her Sir, ſhe'ld ſpeak with you agen! Ampl. Sir, it mine Eies,inall their health and glory, Had not the power to warm youinto Love, Where are my hopes, now they are dim, and have Almoſt forgot the benefir of light ! Eld. Pal. Not love ! Lady 1 Queen of my heart! what oaths Or execrations can perſwade your faith From ſuch a cruel jealouſie ! Amp, I'd have fometeſtimony Sir , if bur Teaſſure the world, my love and bounty ar My death, were both conferr'd on one, that ſhew'd So much requital, as declares he was Of gentle humane race ! Eld. Pal. What ſhall I doe ? Preſcribeme dangers now, horrid as thoſe Which Mid-night fires beget, in Cities overgrown, Or Winter-ſtorms produce at Sea; and try How far my love will make me venture to Augment th'eſteem of yours ! | Ampl. Thar rial of your love which I requeſt Implies no danger Sir ; *tisnot inme Turge any thing, but what your own deſires Would chuſe E14. Pal. Name it / like eager Maſtiffs, chain'd From the encounter of their game, my hot Fierce appetite diminiſheth my ſtrength |! Ampl.”Tis Only this : for fear ſome other ſhould Enjoy you when I'm cold in my laſt ſleep , I would intreat youts fit here, grow ſick, Languiſh, and dye with mee! El4. Pal. How | dye with you 1 Takes Log afede , were
m ſc y Hi
0 ch
Flo choak a Daw! A Lamblaidon the Altar for
- . TheWis,.
Twere fir, you haſtned her to write down all Tthecan beſtow, and in ſome form of Law :
Ifear, ſhee's mad ! her ſenſes are ſo loſt, heel never find them to her uſe agen /
Lace. I pray Sir why ?
Eld. Pal. Did you not heare what a fantaſtick ſute thee makes, that I would fic and dye with her 2
Luce. Does this requeſt ſeem ſtrange ? you will do For a Lady, that deny to bring her (little Onward her laſt journey ,; or is't your thrift > Alas you know, Souls travel without charge !
ElA. Pal. Her little skull is tainted too !
Ampl. Is be not willing Lace?
E/d. Pal. My beſt dear Lady, I am willing to Reſignmy ſelf to any thing but death ! Do not ſuſpeRt my kindneſs now ; In troth
Ive buſineſs upon Earth will hold me here
At leaſt a ſcore or two of years, but when That's done; I am content to follow you ! Amp. If chis perſwaſion cannot reach at your
-IConſent, yetlet me witneſs ſo much love
Inyou, as may enforce your languiſh, and
Decay, for my departure from your {1ght. . Lace, Can you do leſs then languiſh for her death ?
Sit down here, and begin | true ſorrow Sir ,
K you have any in your breſt will quickly
Bring you low enough !
E/d. Pal. Alas good Ladies! do youthink my languiſh.
\nd grief is to begin upon me now ? menT aven knows how I have pin'd, and groan'd, fince firit our letter gave me knowledge of the cauſe 1 _:
Luce,lt is not ſeen Sir in your face ! | Ed. Pal. My face 1 1 grant you; I bate inwardly] m ſcorch'd, and dry'd, with fighing,to a Mumanue ? y Heart and Liver are not big enough
|
56 The Wits, A ſacrifice hath much moreentrails in't ! |
Lxce.Yer ſtill your ſorrowalters not your face ?
Ela, Pal. Why h6,1f [No man, that eyer was' Of Nature's making, hath a face moulded No With les help for hypocriſie than mine ! | To | Ginet. Greac pitry Sir ! | E14. Pal. Though 1 endur'd the Diet and che Flux ; I Shox
Lay ſeven days buried up to'*ch Lips like a "> And Dectas'd xd Indian in wart ſand ;, whilſt his JTha Afﬀidted Female wipes his fk foam off E
With her own hair feeds him with Buds of Guaicum'  E
For his falad , and Pulp of Salſa for You! His Bread; I ſay, all this endur'd would. not _ ot Concerh my face | Nothing can decline that / 40ab Amp. Yet you are vs'd Sir, to bate inwardly! —Pknc Eld. Pal. More then htiys unlanded, or unjoynter guar Enter Engine. ( WivePrav
Engine. What ſhall we do? Sir Tirant Thrift's como hb home ! «
4
Ela. Pal.Sir Tirant Thrift | Luce. My Ladie's Guatd dianSir' | and k
Amp He meets th'expeRed hour, juſt ro my wiſh ! *Þ, £%
Luce, W hat; hath he brought a Husband for my LadyPour
Engin; There is a certain one legg'd Gentleman,* Þ c0! Whoſe better half or limbsis wood ;, for whom * * Kind Nature did provide no hands, to prevent Stealing ; and to augment his gracefulneſs, Hee's crooked as a Witches Pin!
Lace, 1s he ſo much wood ? is th Engine, So much, tharif my Lady were in health, G# And married to him, as her Guardian did \gen, Propoſe, we ſhould have an excellent generation An Of Bed-ſtaves. Luce, When does he come ? Lne Engine, To night if his ſlow Litter will conſent , Am
» For they convey him tenderly, leſt his bould
Sharp bones ſhould grate cogerher : Sir Pallariie, Pylew A oy
} ; The Wits, wiſh you could eſcape my Maſters fight i F Ed. Pal. Is he coming hither ? |} Emngize. Hee's at the door! My Ladies ſickneſs was {No ſooner told him, bur he ſtraight projects To proffer her a Will of his own making! {He means Sir to be heir of all: if he 2 Should ſee you here, he would ſuſpe& my loyaltie, ” JAnd doubt you for ſome cunning Inſtrument, YThat meansto interrupt his covetous hopes! E14: Pal. Then le be gone. Engine. No Sir, heneeds muſt meet you in our paſſage down ! beſides, it is not fit br you and your great hopes, with my dependancie ' $0n both, co have you abſent when my Lady dyes; Þknow you muſt haveall : Sir Icould wiſh er(ſtar wee might hide you here ! — iveraw out the Cheſt within, that's big enough omeſſo hold you : it were dangerous to have ( Cheſt Ply Ladies Guardian to find you Sir ! —T hey draw ina add » Ed. Pal. How !layd up like a bruſh'd Gown under Ind key ! By this ou light, not1! (lock; Luce, O Sir, it but to fave the honour of our Miſtris fame, what will he think to ſee dcomely, and fo ſtraight a Gentleman Konverſe here with aLadyin her Chamber . ind in a time that makes for his ſuſpicion roo, When hee's from home ! Eld. Pal. Thate encloſure, I! s the humor of a diſtreſs'd Rat ! Ih} Girer. 1tis retirement Sir, and you'l come forth *Þgen, ſo ſage! | Ampl. Sit Pallatine |—— , Lace. Your Lady calls Sir, to her, and be kind [ Ampl. Will you permit the laſt of all my howers uld be defil'd with Infamie, proclaim” - \Ylewder Tongues, to beunchaſte ev'n at 9; | E
T7
_,
+ # ® £ n:
1! ady
| o .
58 The Wits, My death ?*whar will my Guardian gueſs to find You here ?
El{d.Pal, No mote, lle in ! but think on*c gentle Lady! Firſt to bate.inwardly, and then to/ have Ye
My oytward perſon ſhut thus and inclos'd
From dAgight, and your company, 1 ſay (Cheſt Z
Burt think;F&he not worſe than death '— He enters the Shi Amp. Lock him up ZLuce,fafe as thy Mayden-head!-f :
Emer Sir Tirant T brift, Th Thrift, Engine, where's my charge Engine, my deare charge |
Engin. Sick as Itold you Sir, and loſt to all
The hope, that earthly med'cine can-procure /
Her Phyſitians have taken their laſt fees
And then went hence ſhaking their empty heads, Wis!
As they had left leſs brain than hope ! A Thrift. Alas poor Charge ! come, let me ſee hatfiou / Engine ! Ont
Luce. Atdiſtance Sir, I pray, for I have heard \Fhe Your breath is ſomewhat ſowre, with overtaſtirg Sir, Foy On Holy-day Eeves ! T
T brift. Ha | what is ſhee Engine ? d 1
Engin, /+-pure,good ſoul,one that your Ward deluSnow
For love and kindreds ſake, rhaye neer her at An Her death , ſhee*l outwatch a long Ruſh Candle, ou'l And reades to her all night the Poſie of Thr Spiritual Flowers !
Thrift, > oes ſhe not gape for Legacies ? tall w
Engin Tye no! there's a Cornelian Ring, perbap] An; Sheeaimes ar, coſt Ten Groats, or a wrought Smodffemai; My Lady made now *gainſt her wedding Sir ; Limi Trifles which Mayds deſire to weep upon cee, With Fan'ral Tales, after a Midnight Poſlic. aſt
Thrift. Thou ſayd{t below, ſhe hath made mee lgfmbroj
heire. have |
E-»gin, Ofall, eyento her Slippers and her Pins !' | Z ind
V '
»
Le.
2 F #4
The Wits, 5aA-. Amp. Luce, me thought ZeceI heard MyGuardi. ans voyce | : Exgin, |t ſeems her ſenſes are grown warm agen, * Your preſence will recover her ! Thrift, Will it recover her, thenlle be gon! Exgin, No Sir ſhee'l ſtraight grow cold agen | On!on! ſhe looks that you would ſpeak to her. : Thrift. Alas poor Charge | I little thought to ſee This doleful day. Amp. Wee all are-mortal Sir ! Thrift. 1've taken care, and labour, to provide
A Husband for thee ; hee's in's Litter now,
JHſtening to Town , a fine young Gentleman |
Onely a lictle rumpled in the womb, With fals his Mother took, after his making. Amp. Death is my husbang now | but yet I thank
ſou for your tender pains, and wiſh you would
dntinue it in quiet promy my Legacies,
hen I am palt the power to ſee it Sir ;
ſou ſhall enjoy all!
Thrift. This will occaſion more Church building,
d railing of new Hoſpitals ; there were
now before; but Charge you'l have it ſo.
Amp. Ile make Sir one requeſt ; which I have hope;
ou'l grant in thankfulneſs to all my bounty /
T " Odeare Charge ! any thing ! Your Couzen ere
tall witneſs the conſent and AR. ,
baps] Amp. Becauſe 1 would not have my vanities modfemain, as fond examples to perſwade
ee It
ns !
imitation in thoſe Ladies that "on ceed my youthful Pride i'th Town : my Plumes, _ taſtick Flowers, and Chains ; my haughty Rich | roideries : my gawdy Gowns, and wanton Jewels, tave lock'd within a Cheſt / Lace, There Sir, there the Cheſt ſtands, mw | | E 2 | Ampli
65 © __Wwn-
- Ampl.” Mi! defire it may be buried with me ! Thrift. Engine, take care Exgine, to ſee it done ' Ampl. Now Sir, 1 beſeech you leave mee : for 'twil | |
But make my death more forrowtul, thus to Continue my converſe with one, I ſo Mauch love, and muſt forſake atlaft. 7 Thrift. Alack, alack ! bury her to night Engine / L Exgir. Not Sir, unleſs ſhe dies. Her Anceſtors Y Have ſojourn'd long here in St. Bartholmewes, In And there'sa Vault ch Pariſh Church, kept only W For her Family ; ſhe muſt be buried there. H Thrift. 1 Engine, 1, andletme ſee, the Church Thou knowſt, joyns to my houſe, a good prevention From a large walke ; *rwill ſave the charge of Torch- | Hi lishr. Y Zogin. W hat Fun'ral Gheſts ? the neighbours Sir, Fo will look To be invited ! | Thrift, No more then will ſuffice Be To carry down the Corps; and thou knowſt Ergine, ] Shee isno great weight. Go Engin. And what to entertain them Sir ? , Thrift. A little Roſe-marie, which thou mayſt ſted} 7 From th'Temple G arden, and as many Comfits E As might ſerve to Chriſtena Watch-mans Baſtard : Ihe Twill be enough ! 4 Exgin. This will not doe! Your Citizen Of / Is% moſt fierce devourer Sir, of Plums ! * E Six will deſtroy as many as can make A A Banquet for an Armie / | Th'a Thrift. Ile have no more, Engine. His |
Ile have no more, nor (d'you heare ) no Burnt winefIpo!
I doe not like this drinking healths to*th memory p
O'th dead, it is prophane, Of o
Engin, You are obay'd ! X L1
Purair, let me adviſe you now to truſt
vil
The, VVits-- 61, The care and benefit of all your fate " = Preſents you in this houſe, to my diſcretion 7;
And get you inſtantly:ro horſe agen.
Thriſe, Why Engize, ſpeak ?
Ezgin. In bricf, you know, that all The/Writings which concern your Wards eſtate,
Lye at her Lawyers fifteen Miles from hence!
Your credit, he not knowing ( Sir: ). ſhee's ſick,
Will eas'ly tempt them to your own Poſſeſſion : Which, once injoy'd, irs free from all licigious ſutes His envie might incenſe her Kindred to !
Thrift. Enough Exgine, I am gene /
Exgin. If you ſhould meer the crooked Lover in-: - His Litter Sir ( as*tis in your own rode.) | You may perſwade him move like a Crib, backward ; For here's no mixture, but with worms. © -
Thrift. *Tis well; thought, on Engine -! farewell
Engine | | Be faithful and be rich
Engin. My breeding and Good manners Sir, teach me tYattend your bounty 1.
Thrift. But Exgine, 1 could wiſh, ſhe would be ſure
To dyeto night !_ |
Engin, Alas good Soul /Jle undertake 'e the ſhall do-any thingtoplezſe you Sir! — Exit Thrift.
Ampl. Engine thou haſt wrought above the power Of Accident, or Art !
Engin, If you conſider't with a juſt
Andlib'rall brain ; firſt, co prevent Traccef, and tedious viſits of. the Fiend His love-ſick Monſter, and then rid him hence,
Ulpon a journey to preſerve this houſe
mpty and free to celebrate the reſt ; Of our deſigns! _.. 1 (atthe Cheſt, Luce. This Engine, is thy Hollyday!— Luce kyocks
- [What hoa 1 Sir Pallatine, are you withia ?
Fx I The Wits, | Eld. Pal. ” Sir Tireant Thrift gone ? open Lady? 0 : Lace. "The Cazement Sir T will, a little to Increaſe your witſhips allowance ofaire!—opers awichet But rh*croth, for 1162.9 limbs youmay at tend of As ſoon expetir ina Gally Sir, the Cheſt Aﬀeer ſix Murders and a Rape ! El. Pal. How Lady of the Lawn ! Zace.Sir Lawncelet Yo may believ't, if your diſcreet faith pleaſe , This Tenement is cheap, here.you ſhall dwell, Keepe home, and be no wanderer ! Eld. Pal. The Poxtake me if I like this ! ſure when Thyadvice of t*Ancrentsis bur asK'd,” they'l ſay Jam now worſe, than in the Rate of a Bawd! Engin. D you know this Lady Sit ? . Pel. The Lady Ample. Her vayle's offcoo 7 and in the loſty garb Of health and merriment ! Now ſhallI grow As modeſt as a ſnayle that in's affiition . Shrinks up himſelf. and*s horns ito his ſhell, Aſham'd ſtill to be ſeen. | © Ampl: Couldftthou believe, Thou bearded Babe ! thou dull ingendrer ! * |, Male rather inthe back, than in the brain, That I could fickenfor thy love ? for th* cold Society ofa thin Northern Wit! ——E14. Pallatine ſing Ela. Pal. Then Trojans waile with great remorſe, The Greeks are lock'd <1 wooden horſe.! Exter To: Pal.
Luce. Pall, come in Pall | tis done! the ſpacious Man
Of Land, is now contented with his own length. Ample. Your Brothers cometo ſee you Sir ! | El4.Pal. Brother ! Mad Gitles theſe ! could{t c<
- .__ - . believ't firrah! 5 |
* Tam Coffin'd.up like a Salrgon Pye,
New ſent from Der fire for a token ! Come,
Break up the Cheſt / | |
We 4. To: Pal
Ell
The Wits, 63>
Yo: Pal. Stay Brother, whoſe Cheſt is it ?
El. Pal Thoul'task more:queſtions then a Conſtable In's fleepe ! prethee diſpatch !
To: Pal, Brother, | can,
Bur marke the Malice and the envy of
Your nature: I am no ſooner exalted
To rich Poſleflions, and a glorious meen ,
But ſtraight you tempt mee to a forteiture
Of all ; ro commir Felony; break openCheſts! El. Pal. Ofor Dame Patience | the Fools Miſtreſs ! To: Pal. Brother, you have prayd well, heaven ſend
her you /
You muſt forſake your own fair fernle ſoyle,
To live here by your Wits !
Luce. Anddream Sir of Enjoying goodly Ladies fix yards high /
With Sactin Trains behind them ten yards long !
Amp. Cloth'd all in Purple, andimbroydred with Emboſſements wrought in Imig'ry, the works © O'th ancient Poets drawn into {1militude,
And cunning ſhape!
Gin, And this attain'd Sir by your Wits. (bur
To; Pal. Nothing could pleaſe your haughty Pallat The Muskatelli, wa Frantiniak Grape !
Your Turin and your Tuſcan Veale, with Red Legg'd Partridge of the Genoa hils '/
Engin. Wich your broad Liver o'th Venetian Gooſe , Fatned by a Jew; and your aged Carpe,
Bred th Geneva Lake ?
Ampl.
Luce. Fan this maintain'd Sir by your Wits !
Gmet,
Eng. And then you talk'd Sir of your Snails Vane from The dewy Marble Quarries of Carrara, | And fows'd in Luca Oyle ; with Cream of Z Witzerland And Gemapaſlte,
E 4. To: Pal
64 The Wits.
To: Pal. Your Angelots of Brie ' Your Marſolini, and Parmaſan of Zodt ! Your MalamuckaMellons, and Cicilian Dates ! And then to cloſe your proud voluptuous Maw, Marmalad made, by the cleanly Nunns of Lisbonne !
Amp, Luce. And ſtill thus feaſted by your wits! Gnet. E14. Pal. Deafned with tyranny ? is there no end ! Ampl. Yes Sir, an end of you; you ſhall be now Convay'd into a clofſe dark Vault, there keep My filent Grandſire company , and all | The Muſficke of your groanes, engrofs to your own E1d. Pal. How ! buried, and alive ? ( cares To: Pal. Brother ! your hand ! Farewel ! I'm for the North ! the fame of this Your voſuntary death, will there be thoughc Pure courteſie to me. } mean to take Poſſeſſion fir, and patiently converſe With all thoſe Hindes, thoſe Heards, and Flocks, Thatyou diſdain'd in fulneſs of your Wit / Luce. Help Pall to carry him ! he takes it heavily 1— . Eld, Pal, Tle not endur't ! fire | murder ! fire! treaſon ! Marder ! treaſon ! fire! —- Amp. Alas you arenot heard ! The houſe contains none but our ſelves ! Exit carrying out the Cheſt, Erter Thwack, Pert, eager. Pert. We bring youlir, commends from Pallatin: ! Thwath, Thad as live,y'had brought it from the Devil! Together with his horns boyld to a Jelly, For a Cordial againſt luſt ! AMeag. We mean the younger Pallatine , one Sir, T hat loves your perſon, and laments this chance, . Which his falſe brother hath expoſ'd you to ! ” | $4 Pert,
wn res
vill
The Wits, ' 65 Pert. And as we told you Sir, by his command, Wehave compounded with the Conſtable ,
In whoſe dark houſe, y'are now a Priſoner 1
But Sir, tak* on my Faith ; you muſt disburſe ! for Gold is a Reſtorative, as well
Toliberty 2s health ! Thwack, And you beleeve (It ſeems that your ſmall-rtinie Officer
Will cake his UnRionin the Palm as lovingly,
As your exalted Grandee that aws all
With hideous voice and face.
Pert. Even ſo the Moderns render it /
Thwack, But Gentlemen, you ask a hundred pounds , Tis all I've left. Pert. Sir, do but think what a prodigious blemiſh it will be both ro Your ingenuity, and fame, to be Letray'd by one, that is deliev'd no wittier than Your ſelf, and lye impriſon'd for a Bawd !
Thw. Sir name it not? You kill me through the © ear ; [d rather Sir, y'ould take my Mother from
Her grave, and put her todo Pennance in Her winding ſheer : there is the Sum. — . Tle in Sir,and diſcharge you! Exit AMeager.
W. Theſe carnal MulQs and Tributes are def gnd ly to ſuch vain people as have Land; Are you, and your friend Landed Sir?
Pert. Such Land as we can ſhare Sir in the Map.
Thw.Lo'you there now : Theſe live by their Wits ! yy ſhould not I take the next Key 1 meet,
And open this great head 5 to try it there Be any bratns left, but ſowre Curds and Plum-broth! Couzen'd in my Youth! couzen'din my Ape ! ir, do you judge, if I have cauſe to curſe bis falſe inhumane Town ' when I was young, , I was arreſted for a ſtale commodity -
yOf Nur-crachkers, long Gi Zges , and aſting Tips
Now I am old, imprifon'd for a Zawd!
66 The Wits, Pert. Theſe are fad Tales, Thw, I will write down to'th Country to dehort
The Gentry from coming hither, Letters
Of ſtrange dire News, You ſhall diſperſe them Sir, Pert. Moſt faithfully :
Thw. That there are Lents, ſix years long proclaim'd
by chS rate!
That our French and Deal Wines are poyſon'd ſo
Witch Brimſtone by the Hollander, that they
Will onely ſerve tor Med'cine to recoyer
Children of the Itch; and there is not Jeft
Sack enough, to mull for a Parſons cold,
Pert. This needs muſt terrifie !
Thw. That our Theaters are raz'd down, and where They ſtood, hoarſe Midnight Le&tures preach'd by
Wives Of Comb-makers, and Mid-wives of Tower-wharf. Pert. *Twill cake impregnably !
Thw. And thata new Plantation Sir ( mark me) Is made ch Covent Garden, from the Sutlerie O'th German Camps, and the Suburbs of Paris, Where ſuch a ſalt diſeaſe reigns as will make Saſſafras dearer than Unicorns Horn !
Pert. This cannot chuſe but fright the Gentry hence, And more impoveriſh the Town, than a Subverſion of their Fair of Barcholmew,
The abſence of the Terms and Court !
Thw. You ſhall ( if my projeQions thriye ) in les (Fir) than a year, ſtable your horſes in The New Exchange, and graze them in the O14.
Enter To. Pallatine, Meager, Dneaſie, Snore, | HMiff. Snore,
Pert. Jog off, there's Pall,crearing for your liberty.
To: Pall. The Canopy, the Hangings,and the Bed, Are worth more than your Rent! come, y'are overpai Belides, the Gentleman's betray'd, he is no Bawd!
ence:
"os
XUM
The Wits, 67
Smor. Tracly, a very civil Gentleman 1 Las, he hath only roar'd, and ſworn, and curs'd Since he was Vane : no bawdry lle affure ye 1
Miſt. _o- Goſlip 2xeaſie, what a good'yer would ye nave ?
©aea. lam content if you andI were friends :
To. Pall. Come, come, agree !'tis I that ever bleed,
And ſuffer in your wars!
Miſt. $nore Sweet Maſter Pallatine,hear me but ſpeak ! Have I not often ſaid, Why neighbour 9eaſee, Come to my houſe , beſides, your Daughter 27all,
You know laſt Pompeon time, din'd with me thrice, When my childs beſt yellow ſtockings were miſting; And a new Pewter Porringer mark'd with P. Z.
$nor, I for Elizabeth Smnore ' |
Miſt .Snor The Pewterer that mark'dit was my Un- Dxe. Why, did my Daughter ſteal your goods ? (cle. Miſt. $nor. You hear me ſay nothing, bur there is
As bad as this ( 1 warrant ye ) learn't art The Bakehouſe 11le have an Oven o mine own ſhortly.
To. Pal.Come no more words/there's to reconcile you, In Burnt Wine, and Cake, Go, ger you all in:
I'm full of bufinefs, and ſtrange Miſtery. F xennt Fn re, Miſt. $noxe, Bucaſie.
Meag. A hundred Pall; was all his ſtore, it lies Kere my brave boy, warm and ſecure _in Pouch.
' Pexr, Wee'l ſhar*c anon. —W hat need you bluſh Sir Like a Maid newly undone ina dark ( Merglay, Entrie? There are difaſlers ſure, as bad As yours recorded in the Citie Annals,
T hw.Your Brother is a Gentleman.of a Moſt even, and blefled compoſition, Sir ; His very blood, is made of Holy Water,
of Leſs ſalr, than Almond-milk,
To. Pal. My ſilly reprehenſion's were deſpis'd; Ywould be his Diſciple, and follow him, Ina new Path, unknownto his own feet. Yre
£8 The Wits.
Yet1've walk'd in it ſince, and proſper'd as You ſee, withour or Land, or Tenement. Thw.”Tis poſſible to live b'our Wits! that is As evidentas light, no humane learning Shall adviſe me from that Faith Yo. Pal. Sir Knight, what will you give worthy my And me, if aftera concealment of (brain Your preſent ſhame, I can adviſe you, how, Teatchieve ſuch ſtore of wealth, and treaſure, as Shalt keep you here, th'exemplar ory of The Town, a long whole year without relief Or charge, from your own Rents. This (1 take it) Was the whole Pride,at which,ſome few days ſince, Your fancie aim'd | Thw. This was Sir in the hours Of haughtineſs and hope ! but now— Te. Pal; lle do't : whilſt my poor Brother to0;low,and Declin'd, ſhall ſee, and envie ir. Thwack. Live in full port, obſerv'd, and wondred at? Wine, ever flowing in large Saxon Romekins About my board, with your ſoft farſnert ſmock Ar night; and forreign Muſick to entranſe ? To. Pal. All this, and more than thy inyention can Invite thee too, Thy. lle make thee heir of my Eſtate! rake my right hand, and your two friends For witneſles. Yo, Pal. Enough, hear me with haſte! The Lady Ample's dead , Nay, there are things Have chanc'd {ince your concealment far more fic For wonder Sir, than this; Out of a filly piety, Tavoida thirſt of Gold, and gawdy Pride Frh world; ſ'ath buried with Fer in a Cheſt, Her Jewels, and her Clothes, beſides, as I'm Enform'd by Zace ( my wiſe Intelligence) Five thouſand pounds in Gold, a Legacie , Lefc by her Aunt more then her Guardian knew ! s | | Thwack
ny
110
at?
an
te!
1ach
IWhy,you are no more mortify'd; then Men
The Wits. 69
Thwack. Well, whatof this ?
Yo. Pal. Your felf, and 1, joyn'd Sir ina moſt firm
And loyal League, may rob this Cheſt ;
Thwack. Marrie, and will.
Yo. Pal. Then when yourpromiſe is but ratif?d,
Take all the treaſure for your own expence /
Thw. Come let us go; my fingers burn till they
Are telling it : The night will grow upornt's :
Only you and I, le not truſt new Faces:
Diſmiſs theſe Gentlemen, Yo. Pal. At the next ſtreet Sir *
Thw. This is at leaſt a girn of Fortune, if
Not a fair ſmile. I'm ſtill for my old Problem ,
Since the living rob me, le rob the dead.
Yo. Pal. On my delicious Per: : Now is the time
To m2ke our Purſes ſwell, and Spiritsclimbe.
Exemnt omnes.
A.
ACT, 5. SCEN. 1, Enter Yo. Pallatine, Ample, Luce, Engine, with a Torch. Ye. Pal. Engine, draw out the Cheſt, and ope the Wic- Let us not hinder him the ayre, ſince 'is (ket ! Become his food | Ed. Pa/. Who's there ? what are you, ſpeak ! Amp. A brace of mourning Virgins Sir, that had You dy'd in Love, and in your Wits, would now Have brought Roſes, and Lilhes, Buds of the Brier , And Summer Pinks co ſtrew upon your Herſe, E/4. Pal. Then you reſolve me dead / Lace, *Twere good that you would fo reſolve your ſelf : Yo, Pal. She counſels you to wiſe and ſevere thoughts ,
That
Rd
70 The Wits,
That are about to dance theMorrice!
El. Pal. Ladies and Brother too ( whom Ibegin To worſhip now, . for tenderneſs of heart ) Can you believe, Lam ſo leaden, ſtupid, And fo yery a Fiſh, co think you dare Thus curther me in bravery of Mirth, You have gone far ; part of my fuff rance I Confteſs a juſtice co me |
Amp. O, do you lo ! Hath your hearr, and brain met uponthat point , And render'd you filly to your own thoughts !
E/d. Pal. Somewhar miſtaken 1'th projeQtion of My journey hither ! Three hours in a Cheſt Among the dezd , will proficmore than three Years in a Study ; *Mongſt Fathers, Schoolmen, And Phyloſophers !
To. Pal. And yare perſwaded now, that there is
rel:tive
Toth maintaining of a poor younger Brother, Something beſide his Wits ?
E/d. Pal. 'Tisfo conceiy'd!
Ampl. And that we Ladies of the Town, or Court, Have nor ſuch waxen hearts, that ev'ry beam From a hot Lovers Eie, can melethem through Qur Breaſts ?
El. Pal. Faith, 'tis imagin'd too /
Luce That though th'unruly Appetites of ſome Perverted few of our fraile Sex, have made Them yield therr honours to unlawful love ,
Yet there isno fach want of you Male-finners
As ſhould conſtrainthem hyre you to't with Gold ? E14. Pall. Y have taught mea new Muſick, 1am all
Conſent, and concordance /
Ela
An Engin.And that the nimble packing hand, the ſwilt [This i: Diſordered ſhuffle, or the flur, or his We ha
More baſe imployment, that with youth, and an | Eternal
©
| TheWits, 71 Ecernal back, engenders for his bread ;
Doe all belong to Men, that may be faid
To live Sir, by their Sinns, not by their Witts /
E14. Pal. Sir, whomT lovenor, nor deſire to love, | am of your minde too '
Yo: Pal. Madam, a faire converſion, 'tis now fic
ifue unto you, for his liberty /
Ampl. Alas, he hath fo profited in this
Retirement, thabI feare he will not willingly
Come our / El4. Pal. O Lady, doubt it not ! Open the Cheſt Amp. A little patience Sir / Enter Ginet.
Ginet. Madam, we are undone, your Guardian is Atdore, knocking as if he meant to wake All his dead Neighbours in the Church ! Ampl. So ſoon return'd! itis not midnight yet | is | Engin, Iknow the bayt that tempts him back with ſuch frange haſt ; and have according to your will Provided ( Madzm ) ro betray his hopes ! Ample. Excellent Engine | Eng. This Key convays you through the Chancel to rt, JThe houſe Gall ry ! My waylies here, Ileler Him in, and try how our deſign will reliſh! - Exit Engize. Amp. Come ſir itis decreed in our wiſe Counſell, You muſt be laid ſome diſtance from this place /! E14. Pal. Pray fave your labour ( Madam ) Ile come forth ! Amp. No ſir, not yet! El4d. Pal. Brother, a caſt of your voyce ! 70: Pal. She hath the Key Brother ! *tis bur an howres Darke contemplation more ! 1all } E/4. Pal. Madam here me ſpeak. Amp. Nay no beginning of orations now , wilt [This is a time of great diſpatch, and haſt , RET We have more plots then a General ina fiege! -Ex.car-
"1 | rying out the Cheſt.
T
fr.
©Y The Wits,
Enter Thrift,” Engine, _ Engine. None of tlie Writings vir, and yet perplex . Your ſelf, with ſo much ſpeed 1na return / Ir, Thrift. The Lawyer was from home, but Engive,T ,Jj, Had hope to have prevented by my haſt, | Though not her Fun'ral, yer the Fun'ral of E The Chelt, Ah dear Exgine, tell me bur why 7 So much pure innocent Treaſure, ſhould be Thus thrown into a dark forgerfulneſs / The Engine, 1 thought Ihad encountred his intents! }- g All Sir, that Law, allow'd her bounty to Bar: Beftow, is yours, but for the Cheſt, truſt me, Ale *Tis buried fr, the Keyis here fir, ofno uſe ! 7 Thrift. Hah, Engine Give it me ! S)
Eng. AndSir, to vex your mediation more, Though not with Manners, yet with.truth , know there Is hidden in that Cheſt a plenteous heap Of Gold , rogether with a Rope of moſt Ineſtim3ble Pearl, left by herlate Me
Dead Aunt by will, and kept from your diſcovery ! n
Thrift. 1s this true, Engine ? Y,.
Engin, That preciſe Chit Zace, her couzen Puritan hed 1 Was atth'interring oft, conceal'dit rill Your The Fur'ral forms were paſt, andthenforfooth, | Mic Shee boaſted that jt was a pious Means, Bly -
— To avoyd covetous defires1*ch world / Pore Thrift, Theſe Fan'ral tales ( Engine ) are ſad indeed; | y,, Able to melt an Eye, though harder than bl, That heart, which did conſent to ſo much cruelty 1 Upon the harmleſs Treafure / Engin, | mournwithin Sir too / Thrift. Give me the Key, that leads me from my houſe, | Unto the Chauncel doore ! "Engin. Tis very late Sir, whither will you goe ? "Thrift. Never.too late to pray ; My heaxt is heavie * Expin. Where ſhall I wait you Sir ? Thri
ends The) Wits, T3 "m fe Ac mylow Gall'ry door, Finay chance ſtay long, / | Engine. this takes me more than all the kindneſs! Eier ſh:wdme : adecent tranfmuration+ ( Fortune. | am ho niore' your Steward, but your Spic.. Exexnt.”
Enter To.Pallatine, Pert I Meager, Snore nd atclmen, .
To: Pal: There, there s more Mony for your Watch me thinks. - . - Trave not drunk Wine enough, they do not chitp ' Smoxe; Your Wine mates them; they underſtand it nor, But they have verygood capacity-ir-Ale y | Ale Sir, wilt heat*em more than your Beef Brewis! To: Palt Well, ter them bgve Atecthen _ + Sor. O Sir,2ewill make *um — like __ Silk-knitters of Cock-lane!. - + - Yo. Pal. Meaper, 20400 to 5 Si i En Thrifts houſe, x Lace, and the Ladyare alone, they will . ave cauſe to uſe your diligence, make haſte! Meag. Your dog, ty'd'to a Bottle; ſhall 'nor oubran me ! Exit, Yo. Pal. Perr, ſtay you hete with Maſter Conſtable; ind when occaſion calls, ſee that you draw pu aſty Bil-men forth ; bravely advanc'd r the Colours of Queen Ample and {elf her General 1- - - | Pore If Ale can fortific Fear nor! where's Sir Mo fe ed; To. Pal I'm now, to-meer him i'ch Church-yard, old Blade - 7-;; - there like a tame filcher, he had | re ſtoln *bove Eggs from Marker women ; dan Or 2: or-a'Qheeſe loft + ej ri Wee'l wait.your worſhipin this corner. - | $. Pal, No ſirving, till T eicher come; or ſend. wr. Pray Sir ter's not tay long, *ciea cold = . 6d 1 have nothingon-myBed ar Vita thin Coverlet,and my yonny Perticote :-
rift ©: |
'C
[
{
[2
T; he. Wits,
7% Shee'L.neer fleep ( poorſoul) till Icome bome, | 'JH To. keep her warm COLES & — Pal. You fhull be ſene for frair]. it 3911 Be merry my dul Sons o th Night, and Chirpe ! Exit, $-or. Come neighbour R»xlet' ſighing pays no Rent [| Though the Land-Lady be inlove ! Sing out -ITh 133 7. Þbe They ing a Catch in four Parts, Le 7 h; With Lanthorne on Stall, -at Trea Trip we play," | : For Ale Chieſe and Pudamy, till it he day , F find for owr Breakfaſt ( after long futing)) ''7 zpee ſtealt a S/reve Pig,oth Corft ables getting. (| T4 | ky Enter E ngine. fro
Engin, Sir, draw down your Watgh into the Chutth And let 'um lic hid cloſe by the Veſtrie.dore! _ Pert, Is he:there already? '/', 11+ o ; Engin. Far.Cartiers Sir, make pot more haſt oh Nor lean Phyloſophers t coriſe; Pye ſo. Prepar'd ings, that hee'l find himaſelf miſtaken [. [ Pert. Cloſe by the Veltrie doxe- 7c Eng. Rightfir,; i! 20 Ile to my Latly, apdexpet dharammnC, your ſarp! rilel Pert, Follow Maſter Conſtable; one, andone: | i} Th: Ating File ->:: | | wy er Emter Thrift, witha Candle. $ ſtr; 'T hrift. 1 cannot find where they have hydil r fe:
Coffin! :,, 1 . Ye But there's the Cheſt: Ile Gn it out, that I Tet May have more roar, to ſearch, andriffeit ——i'Thy The =o rn ſeems' one _ cough ftrengdhgh Tor Be old ub mineralyannc
rs <r go RP ;#hat are; - uf Entomb'd abourghee her could. \cheSenſe,/ ide To turn wiſe Thieves, and ftcal thee fram oblivion if 75
( opens ir.)
£
The Wits, 7s
How ! a Halter / whar Fiend affrontsme with |
This Emblem! 1s this the Rope of Orient Pearl ? 4 | and finds a haltey "« Exter Pert, Snore, Watchmen. nz 4 Pert. Now I havetold you Maſter Conſtable,
- The intire plot, marke but, how like that Cheſt, -7 Is co the other, where the Elder Pallatine
Lies a Perdu ;
4 Engine contriv'd them both! ( Watch? Thrift, Hah | what are theſe, the Conſtable and {| Per. Ceaze on him for no leſs than facriledge /
'\Thrift Why neighbors, Gentlemen |! Pert. Ro him. $ (Cover $n5r. We ſhall. know now, who ſtole the Wanſcor from the Font, and the Vicar's Surpliſs! 1th} Perr. Alas grave Sir, become a fotfeiture -zFo'th King, for facriledge |
1 Thrift. Heare me bur ſpeak! {1 Sor. No not in a'cauſe againſt the King | Pert. Lead ro'sown houſe | be ſhall be Pris'ner therg d lock'd up ſafe enough. Thrift. Undone for ever /——— Exennt;
Enter Yo: Pallat : Thwack with an Iron CroW,
. and dark Lanthorn. Thw, Why this was ſuch afirke of Piety, Jnere heard of - Bury her Gold with her ? 'Þis ſtrange her old ſhoos were not interr'd coo r feare the days of Edgar ſhouldreturn,
ten they coyn'd Leather. 4 70: Pal, Come Sir, lay down your Inſtrament} Thy. Why ſo? : x«h.;1, 70: Pal. I'mſo taken with thy free jolly Nature} {Fannorfor my heart proceed to more . fear upon thy liberty : all that on 14 75», How ! notreafure troyar {
E 2 pars
The Wits. \ | Ye Pal. Not fo-moch as will pay'for that ſmall Candl
-We waſte fo finds w out! (bgeb'f L 427 hwack, tathank you Sir ! — Flings down the Cronf Ty of Iron.
Ye, Pal. You ſhall have cauſe; when you hear more En Dark region Sir, folemn, and filent, as (ro thy + Your thoughts maſt be, ere they are mortify'd.
Have I now brought you, to perceive what an - AS "Thameznſc large aſs (under your favour Knight) 7,
Youate tobe fetuc'd, to fackvain ſtratagems . By thar more profound .Foppe,your Friend,my Brother 7x; Thw.How hadtbeen ſerv'd.if Cadibroughc my ſcales } 7, *Hither, to weigh this Gold? but.6n ! your brother ; Þ His | :Whoſe name{let me tell-you firſt)ſounds far worls f x To me then doesa Sergeant to a young ; 011} hat Indebted Lover; that's arreſted in; his Co:ch, | And withis Miſtris by him. (12 | Te. Pall. You are beliey'd : but will you now cot
7
- 4 Is TSLLN
Your j
Me to your griceand love, if 1ſhall make bw Appear; chit in a: kind revengerofowhat - .! 14 [EH Youſuffred Sir, I've made this falſe; and great; uM dare Seducer of mankind to' ſuffer more: + C MWfa r Thw. TheLegend; Talmad;inorthe Alcharon, e |
Have not ſuch doubtful tales as theſe ; but make's Fo thi Appear, I would have evidence. '/ +  ' 7 Fi Kn To. Pal. Thentakeiton my Religion Sit, he was:oFhip n Liid up in durance for a Bawdbefore+ 4Yarp { He betray-d' you ro the ſame pteferment. Ather Thw. Shall chis be juſtify*d; when my diſgrace 47h, Comes to be known; wilt thou then witneſs it. 27 | braj To. Pal. With a deep Oath : AndSir,”w tempt Mien en _= favours'on poor me, that ever mourtyd\ :+ \ | whiſ or all your ſufferings, know you ſhall now +-;:"\Þirics of See him inclosd in a blind Chefty where bee {ther Lies bath'd Sir, ina greater: ſweatthan ere  * hr ney Farnclins took infis own Tub.-.:: ©: * 0. Nat
»% is
- x4 :
The Wits, O97
Thw.Here amongſt Sepulchers,and melancholly Tony
ty Let me but ſee't;/and 1 wi die for joy,,
ow} To make thee inftantly my'her. - |
Te. Pall. You ſhall; _ yet ere the Sun riſe, find bin
re} Enthrall'd roo in a new diſtreſs.
bw} 7hwack. Do'ſt want money ? bring me to Patth.- ment and
A Scriv'ner, Ile ſeal our two pound of Wax, —To, Pal.
To: Pal. You Sir, my neer'it Ally,are you knocks at aſleep ? the Chefs.
ir} Z/4.Pa1 O Brother, art thou come ! quick, let me forth.
Ie} To. Pal, Here is a certain friend of yours preſents
. JHisloving viſit Sir |!—opers the Wicket.
: Ela. Pal. Sir Morglay Thwack ? v9
{bad rarber have ſeen my ſiſter naked. |
'Thwack, Whar, like a baſhful Bedgerdo you draw
'oTJYour head into your' hole agen? Come Sir ,
mOut with char ſage Noddle, that has contriv'd
Þ cunningly for me, and your dear ſelf.
Eld.Pal.Here take my Eie-lids Knight,and fow *em up,
dare nor ſee thy face | Thwack, Bur what think you
f a new Journey from the North, to live
re by your Wits, or midnight viſits Sir,
0 the _ Neece, E/d Pall. ] have offended
VT F+- Knighe
" ſip _ with wire, headed with Rowels of
arp Rippon Spurs. ! He endureany thing
Alther chan thee.
4 Thwack, We have ( 1 thanke -your bounteous
+© | brain
onal W800 with various conſorts,: Sir,
whiſpting Lutes, ro 'ſooth us 1nto flambers,
Mits of Clare to bathe our 'Temples in,
"Frben the wholfome. wordb of woman too,
* "Far never teem'd all this for: nothing (ir.
0. Pal, Come Ike ter hitty forth,
*F 3
— %
C 14
- 1
Thmwcck.
The Wits. Tiw. R ifthou loy ſt me ? Nay lethim nfin'd thus, one ſhort moneth !
Ile fend him downto Country Fairs for a 's New motion made, b'a Germane Ingeneer ! Yo: Pal. *Las he is my Brother. 4 Thw. Orfor afolitary Ape; | + A
Lead captive thus by ch'Hollander, becauſe He came aloft for Spain, and would not for the States! To: Pal. Sir Morglayleave your Lanthorn here,and
My coming at yon dore , Ile let him our ! (ay H
Bur for the new diſtreſs, F promis'd oh
Hisperſon, take icon my manhodd fir, - IM
He feels it ſtrair ! Ne . Thw. Finely enſnar'd agen, andinſtantly! In
To: Pal. Have a good faith andgoe! Exit. Thy,jdn Eld Pal. Dear Brother, wilt thou give me liberty! | Th To: Pal. Upon condition fir, you kiſs theſe Hilts, Swear notto follow me, but here remain d Until the Lady Ample ſhall conſent, The _ To'th freedom I beftow ! — He kiſſes the Hilts | Eld, Pall. Tis done! a vow inviolate ! | He opens the Cheſt and lets him ont, Yo. Pall. Now filence Brother !- not one curſe,
thanks Exit. To: Pal. El. Pal. Fate, and a good Star ſpeed me! thoug I have |
Longlince amaz'd my ſelf e*ne to a Marble,
YetT have courage left, ro ask, what this ;
Might mean? Was ever Two-[egs'd Man thus us'd!o4j Th |  Emter Pert, Smore, & Watchmen.
Pert. Pall. and his friend are gone, 'I.muſt not && His ſight.; but after you have ceaz'd upon him | Lead him a Priſonerto:the Lady roo. — Zxit Pert,'v
' Sno. Warrant ye;though he were Gog,or Heldebra : they tay hold on big Ea. Pal. Howr now ? Whatmean you Sirs?
) | [XUH|
The Wits: Ls Sore. Yieldto the Conſtable; Ed Pal. *Tis yielded fir, that you are Conſtable # {| But where have 1 | offended !
$nore. Heer, Sir, you have committed Sacritedge, And robb'd an A wm Tombe, of himfelf, And his TwoSons kneeling in Braſs |
E/d. Pal. How, Flea Monuments of their Brazen res | SKitns'? and} FS»ore. Look, a Darke Lanthorn, and an IronCrow; ſtay Fine evidence for a Iurie j
E/4 Pal. 1like this plott! The Lady Ample and. My Brother, have molt rare trium n ant Warts; Now by chis hand, Iam moſt eager! In love with both ; IfindT have leſs ry'd all; 4». nd am reſoly'd chugge chem, and their def igns ; ry! | Though they afflit me more, "and more ! Whether
mult I goe? Snore. Away with him / Saucie fellow* examine
The Kings Conſtable — Exennt.
Enter Tong P allatine, Thwack, Ample, Lace,
AMeager- 1... _ I am becqme your Guardians Jaylor,Lady, afelock'dinthe Parlor, and there howles a; Like a Dogs that ſees a Witch flying ! ough Thwack, I tong to heare how my wiſe Tutor thrives th new defeat Amp. "Tis well you are converted ! teleev'c that Gentleman deſerves your thanks. Thwack. Lady ſeal my converſion on your Lipp x ; Tis the firſt leading Kiſs, thatI intend dr after chaſtitie | kiſſes her. $ 70. Pal. Luce, ſee you makethe propoficion good rt; Which I ſhall give my Brother from'this Lady, Irle ſo ſwaddle your ſmall Bones,
$ Luce. ”_ Pall, thou ſhalt. Madam; vou'l pleaſe to
ſta F 4 | To
d!
© it
The Wits, \ To what I lately mention'd ro-your own deſire > 'Y ' Amp... Toev'ryiParticle and more. — Enter (Pert. End Pert- Your Brother's « come.; this ryom muſt be his Mo priſon; - | To. Pal. "Way Lyce, away ; ſtand in the Cloſet Mk- 'E Thar you may hear us boch, and reach my call. (dam | - Thwack: lle ſtay,,and ſee him, - Ze. Pal.No Knight, you are decreed Sir 7razts Judge Jo Go thar way Sir, and force him ro compound. .. Y Thw, Ie fine him ſoundly, he Tilſ's Parle ſhrink like a Bladder in the fire. —Ex#|| - | .» (Amp, Luc. Thw eMeag. I Pen.
Enter Snore, Elder Pallatne,
Snor, Here Sir, this is your Jayle, roo guns for fac Sil A -great Offender. | E14. Pal. Sacriledge | very well. | Nowall the Pulpit-Cuſhions, ali the Hearſe-clothes, And winding ſheets that have been ſtoln abour The Town this year, will be la:d to. my charge. | To: Pal. Pray leave us Maſter Conſtable, and look How Unto your other Bondman in the Parlor —ExitShod ſho Eld.' Pal. This is the wirtieſt off-Spring chat ow EF: Ere had, 1 love him beyond hope or luſt, ( name}” Yo.
My Farher was no Poet ſure, I wonder \ fair
I How. he got him ? EL Lac : Yo. Pal. I know youcurſe menow. hear
E/4. Pal. Brother, incrorh you lie, and who ere b&ſſhar |
- thevesit.
Ye. Pal. Indeed you doe ; Conjurers ina Circle,
That.-baye rais'd upa wrong unis curſe not. - $-much, nor yet ſo inwardly.
Ed. Pat: Vve 'a great mind to kiſs thee.
To: Pall. You have not ſure?
E14. Pal. 1 ſhall doo't, and eat up thy lips ſo far, Till ch'aſt nothing left rv cover A teeth .
Yo, P 's
Phe Wits: I 'Ys. Pal. And can you think all the aftiGion you _  FEndur'd, were merited, firſt, for miſl is [Morglay, your old friend . then , neglet of me \nd b over-valuing your ſelf ? la- | Ed. Pal. Brother , I murmure not , the Traps that in | v0 laid, were ſo ingenious, I could wiſh ge JTo fall in them agent; - -* Yo. Pal. The Lady Ample Sir , hereis the great contriver that hath weav'd xit ſheſe knots ſo intricate and ſafe : Las, I et. (as but her lowly Inſtrument. - ©. E/4. Pal. Ah that Lady! wereI a King: ſhe ſhould it with me under my beſt Canopie, uchÞ\ Silver Scepter in her hand, with which, [d give her leave to break my head for ev'ry faulr [did commit, | Yo. Pal. But ſay, I bring this Lady Sir, unto our lawful ſheets, make her your boſome wife : teſides, the plenty 'of her teritage , ok fow wouldit ſound, that you had conquerd her wore. ho hath ſo often conquer'd you? out} F/4. Pa/, Dear Brother, no new plots: ame” Yo. Pal. Six thouſand pounds Sir is your yearly Rent, \ fair temptation to a diſcreet Lady - Lxce, hath fill'd both mine Ears with hope; beſides, heard her fay, ſhe nere ſhould meet a man, : b&Fhar ſhe could more ſubdue with Wir and Govern- F14d. Pal. That Ile venture, + (ment. "To. Pal. Well my firſt bounty is your freedom Sir, dr thiConſtable obeys no Law, but mine, id now, Madam, 'appear! + Enter Ample, Lace, Amp. Y'are welcome *"mongſt the living, _ E14. Pal. Lady, no words ; if' yave bur fo much ar, |. ' Mercy of could ſecure one that your Eyes affeR.
I
Amp;
3: The. Wits ' Amp. Why, you'r grown arrogant! agen: d'you fſhi
They are ſo weak, to affet you? . -. * Ed Pal. 1 a a heart Bk kind unto my felf, Towiſh they could ; O we ſhould live, © "Amp. Not by our Wits. | Ed. Pal; No no! but with ſuch ſoft content ; Rilli
© Inc
Confpiracie, how to betray our ſelyes An To new delights keep, harmonie with no Me: More noyſe, than what the upper motions make ; ' | 7 And this ſo conſtant too, Twrtles themſelves, 2 Seeing our faith, ſhall ſlightcheir own, and pine With jealouſfie, : E Ampl. Luce, The youth talkes ſence now, no Med} G cine for | You The brain; like to captivity in a dark Cheſt. Him Te: Pall. O Nadam, youare cruel ! . P, Amp. Well my ſad-Convertite ; joy yet at this : Pve often made a yow, to marry on Ren That very day my Wardſhip is expir'd : - Into And two hours ſince, that liberty begun. Wh Luce. Nay, heare her out | your wiſhes ate fo ſawFee . cie Sir, £ Amp: And know, my glory is diſpatch. My Anceſtoqtnd Were of the fierie French, and ans me love, Aw Hoteagerneſs, and baſe | To ' Ed. Pall, Letmeberude Ky Awhile; lye with you judgement, and beget At Sages on that | My deareſt, chiefeſt Lady '—
- Ampl. Your brainsyet fowle, and will recoyl agetſ. | T + "E14. Pall. No more : Ile ſwallow down my Tong
_ Amp. If Sir your nature beſo excellent, IWec As your kind Brother hath confirm'd to Luce, Toa Af mee, follow, and Ile preſent you ſtraight be pi With certain writirigs you ſhall ſeal to, hoodwinck'd, [The
And purely ignorant of what they are ? z is |
You
| This is the ſwifteſt and the eaſieſt teſt,
The Wits...
at I can make of your bold loye ; doe this, ferbaps, I may vouchſafe to marrie you.
/Fſhe writings are within,
ll
Med!
El4 Pal, Lead me to tryal, come !
«Amp. But Sir, 1fI ſhould marry you, it is Inconfidence, I have the better Wit , | And can ſubdue you ſtill to quietneſs, Meek ſafferings, and patient awe,
E1ld. Pal. Nourap me ſtillanew. |
7o: Pall. In Lace, our hopes grow ſtrong and Gi-
antly ! : Execute.
Enter Thrift, Snore, Mift. Snore, ure, Ginet.
Giner, To him Miſtriſs S-ore  *ris he has kept. _
Your Husband from his Bed ſo long, to watc Him for a Church Robberie ! £ Miſt. $Smor. Ah, thou Zadas-! I thought what chou'lſt come to | Remember the Warrant thou ſent'it for mee Into Dack-lane, "cauſe I calld thy Mayd Tret !
-
$
eſt
At New-years-tide, as I have you Sir,
a gen,
n 1 -
d,
Ti
When Iwas faintinvite thy Clerke-to a. heart !
Fee Pye, ſent me b'a Temple Cook, my Siſters,Sweet- Fnea. Nay, and remember who was brought to bed
Under thy Coach-houſe wall, when thoudenid-ſt
A wad of ſtraw, and wouldſt not joynthy half-penny
To ſend for Milke, for the poor Chriſome !
$nor. Now you may ſweeten me with Sugar-loaves
Emter Thwack, Pert, Meager, Engine. _ | Thw. Wee'l teachyou to rob Churches | Slight, -. hereafrer ot
IWeof the Pious ſhall be afrayd to goe
Toa long Exerciſe, for fear our Pockets ſhould
e pick'd ! Come Sir, you ſee already how - _ he neighbours throng to find you ,, will you conſent? ay buc a thouſand pounds a piece to theſe .
Two
4 The Wits: * Two Gentlemen ;;and five hundred more t' Engine. Your crime isthen conceal'd, and your ſelf free.
Afeag. No, he may chbuſe, hee'l' cruſt ro'ch kind 4 hearted Law. | Pn Pert. Let bim, and to Dame Zuſtice too, who thoughF#c Her Ladiſhip be blind, will grope hard Sir, E
4
To find your Money _ 01 Engine. Sit youre rich, beſides you know what youſſhe Have got by your Wards death; I fear you will al
Be begg'd at Court unleſs you come off thus. df Thrift. There is my Cloſet-Key, do what you pleaſe he Ezgine. Gentlemen, lle lead you to it, follow me.; | 7 Thw. Dfyou uſe to find ſuch ſums as theſe beneath | E/ An Oak, after a long March , I think ſure, The wars are not ſo plentiful. Perr. We think ſo too} fir Thw. Y'had better trail a Bodkin, Gentlemen, £ Under the Lady Ample, than a Pike Df « Under a Germa» General. av Pert,Wee'lin for th'mony Sir,and talk anon, "ar Ex. Eng. Pert. Meagh. L
Evter Eld. Pallat. Yo. Pallat, Ample, Luce. Y
Yo. Pal. Sir Tirant Thrift, here is your Ward com | The dead, Cindite you for a Robbery ( fromp E/: Upon her Ghoſt Thrift. Hah !Is ſhe alivetoo | Luce. Yes, and her Wardſhip out, before y'have}mo proffer'd her Th
A Husband Sir, ſo the beſt benefir het Of all your Guardianſhip is loſt. Byth Amp.” Inſeven long years you could not Sir profſho1
A man deform'd enonph, to offer me ( vidgYo.
For your own ends, | Ai Thrift. Couzen'd of wealth, of fame ! Dog EngineÞ'ou 3 940 2,5) 1.07 Brie, Thriffvr)
-  Thw. We muſt have you enclos'd agen : yare very 5» Forward with the Lady. * £14. Pal. * will be Sir, Phall Lntill ſhe groan! this Prieſt ſtxys ſomewhat long. - ns Me en
Thi
TheWits: +. 8 T, -_ How's this ? troth I ſhall. forgive thee then eartily. kin Amp. RE Cane bim i'th behalf of health to chide Þnd jeer for $8 qqpary am ns keep wohMe: Sir, in breath, now I am Ing. Y E14.Pal. Heark Knight! here's hb fg our ears; . I tone of your dull Country Madams, that ſpend (choſe youſheir rime in ſtudying Receipts, to make arch-Pane, and preſerve Plums, that talk df painful Childbirths, Servants wages, and = eaſe heir husbands good Complexion, and his Leg! . -- + | Thwack. New wonders yet ! h | £14. Pal. What was that (Miſtris) which 1Tſeal'd to, hood-wink*d ? | tooÞ ſimple trial of-my confidence and love. Amp. Your Brother has it, *cs a gift ro him df one fair Mannor, _—_ thoſe many that you avein Poſſeſſion Sir ; and inthis Bond, - 'are witneſs to three thouſand -pounds-I give to Lace! feagÞ. Lace, Yes, Sir, for Palland 1 muſt marry too, __ Yo:Pal. I were an Ev'nuch elſe,and the world ſhould ome Kknow'r. from} E/d. Pal. Thou couldſt not have betray'd me to a bounty | | have) more love. Brother, Give thee joy !—-T hw. takes Yo: T hw. ouare the cauſe of all theſe Miracles: (P al-afide herefore I deſire you to be my heir, By this good day you muſt , for I've t'ane order, hough I love your Wit, you ſhall not live by it; 4Ye. Pal. My kind thanks Sir, the poor inns gratitude, Miſt: $nor:Give you joy ſweet Maſter. Pallatine and our Brother too, ze: And ſend you more ſuch wives, hrif&v'ry year as many as ſhall pleaſe heaven, Ty; very Snor: 'Tis day; le not to bed Sir now : my watch... $hall be drunk, at your worſhips wedding, | 70: Pal: They ſhall, and there is Gold enough to keep hem ſo, nal thy reign-be out, — _ Entey
8 The Wits, © he:
| Enter Pert, Meager, Engine, with Money Bags. Ks
Pert. Loaden with compoſition Pal/—— þ {+
Meag. :Tis for your ſake wee grone under theſe (
burdens — |
To; Pall. The Offal of Sir Tirairs Tranks !'Brother, [&: Pray know theſe Getnjemen, they owe you more [FS
Money than they mean to pay now, 'Þe: _ Ed. Pal. gr pot um: Bur no words. my Cas
And you are fake Where ſhall we dine to day ? |
Yo: Pall; At Lucy's Aunts , weel*l make her coſtive 5
Beldamſhip  * bt
Come off, when ſhe beholds a goodly joynture, C
And our faire ho be E1d.Pal. Firſt tothe Church. Lady, RF
Ile make your eirriſh perſon fare” Some of '% Your wm; me, . may become W /- foe Fram Example a Moral too , a8 - astheir Ro fancie well befits, | Thatundertake to live here by their Wits. Ex. onme!
FINIS,
|
4 ze *3+ < = GD CLI EET CD52 ETES! 2S7 24
OO Err a - ——
EPIL OGDE,
CN
e office 0 Epilogue, it now =o 6lfu fu tack the wrinckfes from each brow, To ps? ſeverer ju ts ( if we could | Se mpo come h) Panti they thoughts all ood, Yo perhaps a And fare Tn, were
5. 7468, (frat mah Fes pod rb. fn 44
[T.advance ory yontbful Poet, and his 2 "With a kind doom \ and heel tread boldly then
Tn's beſt new Comich Socks, this Stage agen,
c FEMEI Eo
