Requested Title: V ALENTINIAN
Authors: John Fletcher
Matched Alias: Valentinian
Source Stage: public_domain_stage2_salvage
Source Site: internet_archive
Source ID: bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_valentinian-a-tragedy_fletcher-john_1685
Source Title: Valentinian: a tragedy.  1685
Source Author: Fletcher, John
Source Date: 1685
Source File: cache/author_salvage_ocr/valentinian_1685_searchtext.txt.gz
Notes: Curated salvage from a standalone Internet Archive hocr_searchtext witness for Valentinian, including Rochester's prefatory material and bounded at the printed FINIS.

---
VALENTINIAN: TRAGEDY. |
As *tis Alter'd by the late : EARL « ROCHESTER:
And- Added at the
Together with a Preface concerning the Author _ and his Writings.
By one of his F riends.
| SE 7;
LONDON:
P, inted fcr Hezry Hrringman, and are to be fold by Jof. Kpight, | ! and 7. Szac:7s, at the Sign of the Blze Axchor in the Lower | Valk of the New-Exchange, 1685. b |
YALE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
Bought with the income of the HENRY A. HOMES FUND
THE
PREFACE
Am defir d to let the World know, that my late Lord Rocheſter I zntended to have alter d and corrected this Play much more than
it is, before it hed come abroad, and to have mended not only thoſe Scenes of Fletcher which remain, but his own t00, and the Mo- del of the Plot it ſelf. £ therefore the Reader do not find it every where to anſwer the great Reputation of the Author ; if he think the Plot too thin, or any of the Scenes too long, "tis hop'd he will be ſo juſt to remember, that he looks upon an unfiniſhþd Piece, and what faults foever of this or any other kind ſome may pretend to fee, who cannot yet forgive my Lord the having had more Wit than themſelves, we have all the reafon imaginable to conclude from the correneſs of his other Poetry, that had he liv'd to put the laſt Hand to this, be woud have left trueCriticks and impartial Judges no buſineſs but to admire ;
eſpecially if we confider how much he has mended the old Play by that
little he has done to it, for he had but juſt drawn it into « regular Form, and laid the Plane of what be further deſig nd, when his Coun- trey and his Friends had the irreparable mis fortune to looſe hims. But as the looſeſt Negligence of a great Genins is infinitely preferable to that obſcura diligentia, of which Terence fpeaks, the obſcure dilt- gence 4nd labour d Ornaments of little Pretenders ; and as the rudeſt / TG s of famous Hands have been always more efteemd ( efpect- ally among the knowing ) than the moſt perfet# Pieces of ordinary Painters, th: Publiſhers of Valentinian cou'd not bat belicye, the World wo'd thank 'em for any thing that was of my Lord Rochelſter's manner, tho it might want fome of thoſe nicer Beauties, thoſe Gracc= ftrokes and finiſhing Touches, which are ſo remarkable both in his for- mer and latter Writings : and yet as imperfett as Valentinian # ff, 1 am of opinion his Enemies will not meet with that occaſion in it for their M-natare, which perhaps they expett ; for b-
bus made it a Play, which he did not find it, the thief buſin:ſs % it ; A 2 as
*%
The Preface.
" { «s Fletcher had contriv/d it ) ending with the Fourth AQ, and. 4
. which has no kind of relation to the other, is introduc a _ ord contrary to « Fundamental” Rule cf the Stage ; 1 fay befides that "tis now adorwd with that nec- ſjary Beant) of E Plr, the Unity of Adtion, and judicicuſly heighten d and reforwa tbrorgh the whole condat? of the Plot from mwhat- it ras, thoſe Scomes THICH my Lord has added, have a graci fulneſs ix the C aft, a juſtnfs in th: Sence, and a noblensſ5 in the Genius, altogether like himfcif,. which ( to do my Lord but a bare Right ) is far beyond that of moſt mers who write now, and equal even to the Fancy of F leccher, which I think po man's can exceed, there ts a chearfulneſs in it that is every where entertaining, and a Mettle that never tires. | Brut as my Lord #n the ſuiting of hu Style to that of Fletcher, ( which he here ſeems to have endeavour d, that the Play might took more of 4 Piece J Cats not with any juſtice be deny'd the Glory of having reach d his moſt ad- mir d Heights, and to have match'd him in his Fancy, which was his chief Excellence, ſo it muſt be alſo confeſs d, that my Lora s conſt ant living at Court, and the Converſation of Perſons of Quality, to which from his greeneſt Touth both his Birth and his Choice had accuſtowid him, gave him fome great Advantages above this fo much and ſo juſt- ly applauded Author, I mean, a nicer knowledge both of Mex and. Manners, an Air of good Breeding, and a Gentleman like eaſfineſs in all he "writ; to which Fletcher's obſcure Education, and the mean Company he kept, had made hins wholly a Stranger. If it were at all proper to eh" 0 4 Compariſon, ' where there is fo little Reſemblance, tho Fletcher might be allow'd ſome Preference in the kill of a Plaz- Wright, { 4 thing my Lord had not much fludyd ) in the contrivance and working up of a paſſionate Scene, yet my Lord had ſo many other far more eminent Virtues to lay in the contrary Sale, as muſt neceſ* farily weigh down the Ballance ; for fare there has not liv?'d in man Ages (if ever) ſo extraordinary, and I think I may add (9 uſeful a Perſon, as moſt Engliſhmen know my Lord to have been, whether we conſoder the conſtant good Sence, and the agreeable Mirth of his or- dinary Converſation, or the vaſt Reach and Compaſs of his Inventi- on, and the wonderful Dept hs of his retir 4 PThouzht S, Z he HBCOPWmBOR
| - Gracesof his Faſhion, or the inimitable Turns of his Wit, the becom-
ing gentleneſs, the bewitching ſoftneſs of his C:wility, or the force
and fitneſs of his Satyre ; for as he was both the Deiicht and the Won:
der of Men, the Love and the Dotage of Women, fo he was a conti- wnal Carb to Impertinente, and the pablick Cenſor of Folh.
Never
aid
The Preface.
did Man ſtay in his Company un-entertaind, or leave it un-inftrutt- ' *
ed ; never was his Und-rſtandins biaſsd, or his Pleaſantneſs forcd ;
never did he laugh in the wrong plice, or proſtitute his Sence to ſerve
his Luxury ; never did he #4 into the Wounds of fallen Virtne, with
a bafe and cowardly Inf#lt, or ſmooth the Face of profperoms Villany,. with the Paint and Waſhes of a mercenary Wit ; never did he ſpare « | Fap for being rich, or flatter a K pave for being great. As moſt mer had an Ambition ( thinzing it an indifþutable 1itle to Wit ) tobe in the number of his Friends, fo few were his Enemies, but ſuch as did not know him, or ſuch 4s hated him for what others Iou'd him, and zever did 'he go among Strangers but:he gaind Admirers, if not Frienas,. and commonly of  {uch who had been before prejudicd againſt
him. Never was his Talk thought too much, or his Viſit too long 5
Enjoyment did but iucreafe Appetite, and the more men had of his
\ Company, the lefs willing they were to part with it. He had a Wit. that sou'd make even his Spleen and his Ill-humour pleaſant to his -
Friends, and the publick chiding of his Servants, which woud have been Ill-breeding and intolerable in any other man, became not owly ci- vil and inoffeaſive, but agreeable and entertaining in him. A Wit that coed pleaſe the maſt moroſe, perſvade the moſt obſtinate, and ſof- tex the mnft obdurate. A Wit whoſe Edge cond eaſe jby cutting, and: whoſe. Pornt cou'd tickle while it probd. A Wit that usd to nip inthe
very Bud the growing Fopperies of the Times, and keep down thoſe .
Weeds and Suck-rs of Humanity ; nor was it an Enemy to ſuch only:
as are troubl:ſom to men of fence in Converſation, but to thoſe alſs (of:
a far worſe Natur: * that aredeftruttive of publick Good, and perni--
cious to the common wmntereſt of Mankind ; that Vein of Kpavery that-
hs of late years run through all Orders and Degrees of men among us, ſpreading it ſelf like a peſtilential Poyſon through the great and leſſer- Arteries of our ſeeming ftrous-built Leviathan, damping and cor- rupting the Blood, and choaking the wery vital Spirits of the Kjng= ann. * | NR 1 might here take occaſion to point ont in particular, and laſh ( «s they deſerve) thoſe daily-increafing Tices and long untorretted Follies,,
which are our preſent Grievances : the Subjett is bat too fruitful, and:
the Uſefulneſs too apparent, nor cond I ever purchaſe Reputation at 4
cheaper rate ; nothing is-more eafie than to pull off the thin Veil, and”
Lare the vilens{s of thoſe odious Prattices, which ſome who are ready at any time to run witha Multitnde to do miſchief, applaud for the
higheſt Virtue and M:rit ; nothing requires lefs skill, 154n to baſfte
"F714
Ge en re - CI TE Wn
24+
The Preface.
and expoſe to univerſal Contempt thoſe flight and trivial Notions, which others who ſeem g1ven over tO believe a Lye, cry np for Ma- fter-pieces of Wit and R eaſon ; to name em for _ is to ri- dicule 'em, and but 10 ſtate em rizht #s to confute em. rs prudence will teach 4 714 not 10 hart himſelf, while he vainiy « = ea- wour's the good of others ; for zs there never was any T ime or Coun- zrey that wanted Satyre fo much, that cou'd bear it fo little 4s ours, #o che men 1 wow'd reform are a fort of harden'd irreclaimable Bee heads, wheſe Under ſtandings ſeem perfeet Solids, as dead to Wit, and as inſenſible of Reaſon, as if their Souls and their Bodies (accor- ding to Hobbes's Philoſophy) mere both mage of the fame fluffy and equally impenetrable ; ſo tyd to their litile Prejudices, and /{o wilful zz their Blindneſs, that were they in a Storm at Sea, that threatend every moment thoſe Lives and Fortunes of which they are ſometimes fo unneceſſarily prodigal, it wou'd be impoſſible to make *em own, there were abreath of Wind ſtirring, unleſs it ſaited with their Humonrs, or yes toche purpoſe of their Folly. With them Seeing in ſome Caſes £4 not B-lieving, and the moſt perfect ſence they have | if it croſs their Inclination ] muſt paſs for an Iriſh Evidence. Þ! ſhall leave therefore to their owa Condutt and Deſtiny this forlorn Hope of Iono- rance and Stupiiity, and return to nhat I was ſaying of my Lord Rocheſter. ;
He had a Wit that was accompanied with an unaffeded greatneſs of Mind, and a natural Love to Juſtice and Trath ; a Wit that was in perpetue! War with Knevery, and ever attacking thoſe kind of Vi- ces moſt, whoſe malignity was like to be moſt diffuſive, ſuch as tend- ed more immediately to the prejudice of publick Bodies, and were of a common Nuſance to the happineſs of humane kind. Never was his Pex dr 3a but oathe ſide of good Sence, and uſually imployd like the Arms of the ancient Heroes, to ftop the progreſs of arbitrary Oppreſſi- 0B, and beat down the Bruitiſhn:{s of headftrons Will ; to do his Ring and Countr. ey jrſtice npon fuch publick State-T hieves, as wou d beggar a Kinzdom to enrich themſelves, who abaſins the Confidence, and undeſcruing the Favour of a gracious Prince, will not be aſhantd fo maintain the ch:ating of their Maſter, by the robbing and ſtarving of their fellow-Servants, and under the beſt Form of Government in rhe World bluſh not to live upon the ſpojl of others, till by their im- Pudent Fialztions of Rizht, they grow like Beaſts of Prey, Hoſtes Humani Gene ris. Th'f: were the Vermia whom [ zo hrs eternal 4Jonour ] his Pen was continually pricking and goadine. A Pei, if
BYE
The Preface.
ot fo happy in the Succeſs, as generow in the Aim, as either the Sword of Theſeus,or the Club of Hercules ; nor was it leſs ſharp than that, or leſs weighty than this. Tf he did not take fo much care of himfelf as he ought, he had the Humanity however to wiſh well to others, and T think I may truly affirm, he did the World as much good by a right application of Satyre, as he hurt himſelf by awrong purſuit of Pleaſure. | 1 muſt not here forget, that a conſiderable time before his laſt Sickneſs, his Wit beganto take a more ferious Bent, and to frame and faſhion it ſelf to publick Baſineſs ; he begun to inform himſelf of the Wifaom of our Laws, and the excellent Conſtitution of the Engliſh Government, and to ſpeak in the Houſe of Peers with gezeral appro- bation ; he was inquiſitive after all kind of Hiſtories, that concern'd England, both ancient and modern, and ſet himfelf to read the Jour- nals of Parliament Proceedings. In effett, he ſeemd to ſtudy nothing more, than which way to make that great Underſtanding God had gi- ven him, moſt uſeful to his Countrey, and I am confident, had he liv'd, hu riper Age wou'd have ſerv'd it, as much as his Toath had diverted it. Add to this, the generouſneſs of his Temper, and the: affability of his good Sence ; the willingneſs he ftill ſbow'd to raiſe the oppreſid, and the pleaſure he took to humble the proud ; the conſtant readineſs of his Parts, and that preat preſence of Mind, that never tet him want a fit and pertinent Anſwer to the moſt ſudden and unex- petted Yueftion, | aT alent as uſeful as "tis rare ] the admirable kill he was Maſter of, to countermine the Plots of his Enemies, and break- through the Traps that were laid for him, to work himſelf out of the entanglement of unlucky Accidents, and repair the Indzſcretions of his- Youth, by the quickneſs and fineneſs of his Wit ; the ftrang - facility: * he had to talk to all Capaciries in their own Dialett, and make himfelf” good Company to all kind of People at all times ; ſo that if we wow'd.: find a Soul to refemble that beautiful Portraiture of Man, with which: Lucretius | according to his ſublime manner of Deſcription ] com- plements his Friend Meramius, whex he fays that Venus, the God- defs of Beauty, and ſecond Cauſe of all things, had form'd him to ex- cel [and that upon all occaſions] in every neceſſary Grace and Virtue ;. T jay, if we woud juſtifie this charming Pitture, and clear it from flattery even to humane Nature, we muſt ſet it by my late Lord Ro- cheſter ; of him it may be traly ſaid in the fulleſt ſence of the words,. nm nem tu Dea tempore in omni, - Omnibus ornatum voluifti excellere rebus..
Hhat
The Preface.
What laft, and moſt of all, aeferves admiration in my Lord, Was bis Poetri, which alone is Suoject enough for per petal Papeg rick. But the Charatter of it 1s f general known ; it has fo eminently at- ftingniſy's it felf from that of other men by 4 thouſand irreſiſtible Beantics ; every Body 1s fo n 7/4 acquainted with it, by the effect it has had upon em, that to trace and fingle out the feveral Graces, may ſeem a T ask as ſaper fluons, as to d:feribe ro a Lover the L:zes and Features of his Miftreſs's Face. *lis ſ-:ffictent to chſerve, that his Poetry, like himſclf, was all Original, and has a fkamp fo partculay, fo unlike any thing that has been writ before, that as it d:ſiain'dall ſer- vile imitation, and copying fromothers, fo neither is it capable (7; my opinion) of being copyd, any more than the madner of his Dif- courſe conldbe copyd ; the Excellcncies are too many and too maſtirly ; on the other fide the Faults are few, and thoſe inconſfiderathe ; their Eyes muſt be better than ordinary, who can fee the minute ſpots, with which fo bright a Jewel if ſtain'd, or rather ſet off, for thoſe it has ere of the kind which Horace ſays, can never offend.
—— Quas ant incaria fudtt ;, Aut humana parimm cavit Natura.
Sach little Negligences as Humanity cannot be exempt from, and ſuch as perhaps were neceſſary to make his Lines run natural and eafie ;
for as mars; is more difagreeable either inVerſe or Proſe than a flo-
' wexly looſnefs of Style, fo ox the other hand too nice a Correttnrſs will
be apt to deaden the Life, and make the Piece too ſtiff , between theſe two Extreams is the juſt Charaiter of my Lord Rocheſter's Poetry to
be found, nor do 1 know any thing that the ſevereft Critck, who will
be impartial, can objeft, untcſs he will ſay ( as fome have done) that there is avt altogether ſo much flrength and cloſ*neſs in my Lord's Style, as in that of ont of his Friends, a Perſon of great Quality and Worth, who | think it not proper to name, becauſe be has never yet pablickly own'd any of his Writings, tho" none have been more 9eac- rally or more juſtly admr'd ; bat if my Lord's Sence be not ae os fo ſtrong and full [ for often it is ] as that of this Honourable Perfon his Friend, yet in revenge the Spirit that diffefes it {c if throngh the Whole, and warms and animates every Part , the newnefs of his Thought, the livelin:{s of his Expreſſion, the parity of his Ph: afe and the aclicacy of his Turn is 24mirable ; if he does not fay jo wack i fo little Comp:ſs, yci he ſays always enough to plecje + what he
WAZLS
The Prefaco.
wants in Forceyis ſupply'd in Grace, and whete-he has not this frength and fulneſs of Sence, that is ſo much his Friends partituler Talemy. he has Touches that are more affetting, fo that when we donot find t,. we do not miſs it. To conclide this Point, his Poetry has every where « Tiafture of that unaccountable Charm in his Faſhion and. Converſs- zion, that peculiar Becomingnefs in all he ſaid and did; that dreiy the. Eyes and wor the Hearts of all who came near him, i nt NON The Reader may perhaps judge a Diſcourſe of | this nature very un-- neeſſary ; 1 am apt to believe, no unprejudic'd man, who has read. za Lord Rocheſter*s Writings; will think they cat need 'u Defence ; or that any of his Enemies ſhou'd be. ſo forſxken'both of common Ju-- ftice and common. Semce, ſo blind in their Vanity, and fo umskilful iy their Malice,as to tax him with any failing in Wit ;, He nhoſe Name was the very Mark it paſ'd by, and who feen?d to have in hit Keep- - izg the Privy-Seal of Sence ; and yet ſome ſuch there are, "who ha- 137 20 way to be remarkable above the ordinary Level of. Mankind, but by being ſingular, will needs aſſault him on: this his ſtrongeſt fide; and give occaſion for more than has been net ſaid in bis favour, a fort of men, who have been always fo in Love with themſelves, - as never tobe able to. ſee any merit or hear any praiſe but their own, looking on . what i paid elſewhere [ how due foever. ]'as ſo much ftollen from them, and miſtakins their own Talents as much as they underwalue other men's, are perpetually doing.that moſt which leaſt becomes em; in ſpite of the friendly Admonitions of daily Satyre, and the Remon- Rrances of almoſt all the Town, tir d with the Perſecution, they per- fiſt in aa nntoward ſpiritleſs Vein of Rhiming, being haps too con- fiderable | in their own opinions | to defign the pleaſing any Body but themſelves, and fo far certainly they are inthe Right, in-that they . do not aim at what they can never effet# ; Men who have-got the Form of Poetry without the Power, and by alaborious Tnfipidneſs, « poalif'd Dulaeſs, ſeem not deſizn'd tot as a Diverſion, but condemn d tot ts a Penance for ſome yet uxexpiated Sin of their Forefathers ; Mea who like old Lovers are curſt with a ftrons Inclination and weal Abilities, io whom nothing is more unlucky,” than an opportunity tv [atisfie their unnatural Longings ; fatal to them is the Favour- of "their Muſe, eſpecially if | becauſe they have ill Meens and ugly Faces} they {et up for Satyres ; whea moſt they woud ſerve the Luft of their Spite, they do but betray the Impotence of their Wit. ; but they de- {pair to put off that ferry ftock they have, till by under-rating other mais they have ftarvd the Market, by diſgracing Commodities af au + | A
ite
The Preface.
intriakbh Worth and ſtaple Price , they hope to recommend their — Tinfſel. Fo the amiter f theſe Well-withers ro Verſe and men that are towards Wit, we may reckea [_ and thit mithout doing him any Wrong | the conceal'd Anthor of the late Eſſay upon Poetry, who hes in Print made a moſt unrft, and [ 70 his £9 mer J a moſt malicious Reflexion upon my Lord Rocheſter®s fimce his death, a Reflexion not more #ngenerous in the time and manner of publiſhing it, than abfard in the ſence and matter, as I ſhall preſently make ap- pear, for having always profeſs'd to be my Lord's Friend, 1 cannot bat think my ſelf oblig*d upon this occaſion to vindicate his Memory from fo undeſervd's Libel, Had ny Lord been living, T am of opinion we had. never ſeen either the Reflexion or the Effay. This Author [. whoever he is, of how fond ſoever he may be of his oyn Parts ]coud wot but know himſelf as unfit to play a Prize in Sutyre with my late Lord Rocheſter, as feeble Troilus was heretofore ro fight fing tle with Achilles; and therefore probably wou'd not have provok'd a man, who cou d 'beve beat him to the pround with one f{roke of his Pen, and have forever cruſh'd his creepixe Wit ; Or had he had Bravery enogh to attack my Lord while he was alive, he wou'd certainly have had Honour enough to let him alone when he was dead ; bus as he coud aot but be ſenſible, any falſe Criticiſm upon wy Lord's Poctry daring his Life, muſt needs turn to the Critick's ſhame, fo weithcr cond he pope while my Lord liv'd an Inaempaity. for the dulacſs of his ona ; :t wow have been to no purpoſe then, to pick np Scraps of Boſſu, Ra- pin, Boileay, Mr. Dryden's Prefaces, and Tabtc-T ath, [ for every one. of theſe have a large ſhare in his Eſſay ] and ſead em into the World for « new Art of Poetry, efpecially after he had defac'd the na- #rve Beauty of their thoughts, by new caſting *em in the Mould of a flat wnmnſical Verſe, and pat out all the ſpirit by the colda:{s and deadneſs of bis Expreſſion, my Lord woxd never have fiffrd ſuch a Coyner and Debafer of other meas Bullicn, to take upon him the As- thority of a Sxy-Maſter, nor his light alloy'd Mettle to paſs por the Town for ſterling ; he who by his great Maſtery in Satyre ſeerad to be particulatly truſted with the Juſtice of Apollo, did not »fc to tet the P arloiner's of Wit retail their ftollen Goods to the People, with- out bringing em to open ſhame, nor Quacks aud Mountebanks iz P, oetry, furniſhd with nothing but a few borrow'd Recipes, 70 put 02 the Face and Gravity, and appear in publick with the pride and poſt- tiveneſs of Dottors ; the vaineft Pretenders in his tim, the moſt
confident Eflayers, cow'd and aw'd nader the knows ferce of a ſence fo
if -
The Preface.
uperiour to their own, were plad at any Yate to beep their 18h: out of Obſervation, as he Fowl of 4 whole C ins ad oy ai th: Buſhes, when an Eaple hangs hovering above em. If. euer they attempted to make Verſes, *twas with the ſame - fecrecy that athery. make Love, and none were troubled with the. fight of 'eme, but thoſe who had the ill fortune to be their partictlar Priends ;, however thy. might ſometimes lye under the ſuſpiciox.of Poetry, they tak aare there ſbowd never be Evidence enough to caritt "envy. tha bappy did they. then thins themſchves, if in parting with their vain huge of paſſing jor Wits, they coud eſcape being mark'd out for Fops ; "tis trac, fame few remain'd incorri;ible even then, [ 4s always there will be. ome whom no kind of goud ſence how forcible ſoever can make gny Impreſſs- on «pon | but for the moſt part, Ignorance begun to wear-the Mask of Muzefty, which i certainly her moſt becoming Dreſs, end men were contented to be no wiſer than God had made *ems ; at leaſt thoſe who wanted Mit, did mt contrive | as the manner now is |] to make their dulneſs remarkable, by expoſing to the World their. peinful end frute tefs Endeavors after it, but were willing to be valyed for fame other ']alext [_ perhaps anore beneficial ] which Nature in ber \equitable di fribution of things had given em inſtead of it. Thus was Fanity kept within ſome tolerable Bounds, while my Lord Rocheſter {5w/g, by the general Dread of a Pen fo ſevere and impartial. -\ But: bis D.ath has prov'd a Jubilee to the little Witlings of. the Tows, by which they have got Indulgence for a thauſand Fopperies, meore wiſe
chievous aud more ſenceleſs than were ever yet imparted from France; -
and as much empty Rhime as they are capable of committing as long as they live ; nor have they ſpar'd to ufe this Poetical Licence za the at+ moſt extent of men's patience ; Never was there known” fo manyVer- fifrers, and fo few Poets ; every Aſs that's Romantich,. beliewes he's inſpir'd, and none have been ſo forward to teach others as thoſe why caise not write themſelves ; every man ts ready to be a Judge, but few will
be at the trouble to underſtand, and none are more blind to the faults -
of their own Poetry, than thoſe who are ſo ſharp-ſighted in other men's ; Every Fep that falls in Love, thinks be has a Right.to.make:Sozgs, and all kind of People that are gifted with the leaft knenlcage of Latin and Greek, pretend to tranſlate ; the moſt revereac'd Authors of An- tiquity, heve not been able ty eſcape the Conceitednefs of Eſlayers, mor Rudibras himfe If, that admirable Original, bu little Apers, tho?
fo artlefs are their Imuations,ſo unlike and. fo tiveilefs are their Copies;
that 't vere impoſſible to gueſs after what Hands they'diew, if theiv Vanity did not take careto inform #8 in the Titl:-Page. Fer
_—_— -- II ener ett AE we IE.
The Preface. | ." for Satyfe, that moft needfal-part of our Poetry, it has of late been more abusd, and ts grown more degenerate than any other ; moſs commonly like a Sword-in the hands 'of a Mad-man, it runs a Uilt a6 all manner of Perſons without any fert of diftinition or reaſon, and fo ill-gnided is this furious Career, that the Thruſts are moſt aim'd, where the Enemy i beſt arn?d. Womens Repntations [of what Qya- bty or Condatt foever} heve been reckon'd 4s lawful Game 4s Watch- men's Heads, und-*tis thoight as glorious a piece of Gallantry by ſome of our modern Sparks, to libel « Woman of Honour, as to kill a Con- {fable who is doing his daty ; Juſtice is not in their Natures, and aff tind of uſeful knowledge thes ont of the way of their Breeding \ Slan- der therefore is their Wit; and Dreſſe is their Learning ; Pleaſure their Principle, - avid Intereſt their Gid. But how infamous, infipid,
* ar ignorant foeuer the Authors themſelves are, their Satyres want not
ſting, for npon no better Evidence than thoſe poeticat Fables and pat- pable Forgeries, the poor Ladies, whoſe little Plots they pretend to diſcover, are either made Priſoners in their own Houſes, or baniſh; d rato. the Coumrey during Life ; tho* fo ilkcolour'd generally is the Spite,..and fo utterly woid of all common probability are the brutal Cenfares, that ftuff- up- their licentioms Lampoons, that "tis not eaſie to determine, which of the two deferve moſt to be lanzh'd at, the Fantaſtical Foplings. that write *em; or the Cautious. Coxcombs that believe *em. ' But what: is yet more wonderful,. this Prattice is applauded aud carry'd on by thoſe only, who efteem the gaining of hand- om: Women' the greateft- Felicity the Nature of man is capable of, anake it the Burden of all their empty Talk, and the Buſineſſe of their Lives ; now this ſole deſizn of theirs theſe able Gentlemen eadeavour #0 bring about. by doing what they can irpoa alt occaſions to frieht and indeedforce. the whole Sex from any Commerce with men, and make all Acceſs. to*ems difficult, which is juſt as wiſe as if a man that low'd Set- Ling, 4s: ſoon as he had found his Game, inflead of obſerving the Wind, and preparing his Nets, fhowd hoop and hollow, 'and throw
Stones. at 'em.
This is one Branch of our- preſent Satyre, which has much of thee Nature, and more of the Wit of Jack-Pudding's Buffoon*ry, for as ne, tho he flings Dire at every boay, is anzry with no body, {ſo as theſe Bully-Writers perpetually aſſault People from whom they never
+ ation, and murder their oocd Names in cold X k - ” iS) . _ 2
/ Ra The _ is of a more ſerious Caſt, but withal "tis more ma= ; and falling in with-the be encfs of a corrupt Aze, aves infi-
HUHCE-
The Preface. | | | |
nitely more miſcaief ; this is made to wound where it ought to de- fend, and cover where it ſhou'd expoſe ; to contraditt the very firſt Elements of Morality, and bid defiance to the nnalterable Eſſence of things, by callin2 Good Evil, and Evil Good. Heroes have been: hing up in Effigie who deſervd States, while the worſt of men-have- _ been cens'd with the Praiſerof demi-Gods ; Betrayers of their Iraſt, and little fervers of Turns have been idoliz'd, while Patriots of an' unſtain'd Honour, and unreproachable Conduit, who were in truth: the Dn Tutelares of their diſtraffed Countrey, have been openty: blaſphem*d with an impudent and witleſſe Scurrility ; in a word, thoſe chiefly have been the Authors of Satyres, who onght to be the Subject, and "tis become much more ſcandalous to be thong ht to write the beſt,- than to be put into the moſt abuſive. LEWES.” But [5 I was ſaying} among theſe Wou'd-be: Poets of the Times, who have fcarce any one T alent proper for the Calling, none is more | eminent than the Author of the fore-nam'd Eflay,. who white he pre- tends, without the leaſt colour of Authority, either from Art or Na-+. ture, to be the Muſes Legiſlator, deferves not the Office of their Cryer ; with fo hoarſe and jo untunable a Voice has he republiſh d the poetical Lans, wt of his own, but of their true Repreſentatives fr a- ming ; however he hopes ta diſtinguiſh himſelf from the crowd of com- mox Writers, by a proud and ſpiteful Attempt upon the Reputation of my late Lord Rocheſter, whoſe one Example is worth.all-his' Precepts..- But "tis time to examine what he objeits, and fee if* there be any Vit- in-his Anger ; the Maxim he lays down for the foundation of his S4- tyre &, That Bawdry cannot be Wit ; his words are theſe, Page- the 6th. of hs Eflay,
Bawdry bare-fac'd, that poor Pretence to Wat, Such naufeous Songs, &c.
This is new Dotirine among men of Sence,. but an old thread-bare Sayings among unthinking haif-witted People, who jadge without ex- aminins, and talk without meaning ; Fle anſwer for him, he did not- learn this of any of the Authors 1 mention'd before, to whom be has been ſo much oblig'd for moſt of the other Parts of his Eflay ;' it never yet came into any mans Head, who pretended to be a Critick, except
this 5, that the Wit of a Poet was to be meafur & by the wor His of his Subjett, and that when this was bad, that wuſt be fo too ; the zsnxer of treating his Subjett has been hitherto thought the trae Teſs, for
—_ --
[: The Preface.
FE: ik Poet will depreſſe and diſgrace the bigheft, fo 4 good one Kt ar 45 48 8 ; | h funk and dignifie the loweſt ; ſome of the moſt maſterly Strokes in F/ Virgil are his Deſcriptions of the Employment of Bees, the Jealonſie j- of Bulls, the Luft of Horſes and Boars, the cutting down of a Tree,
| the Working of 4nts, and the Swimming and Hiſſing of Snakes ; F things little and unlovely in themſelves, bat noble and beautiful in
the Pittares he prves ws of em. True Genias, like the Anma Mun-
.di, which ſome of the Ancients believd, will enter into the hardeſt
and dryeft thing, enrich the moſt barren Sel, and inform the meaneſt
and moſt uncomely matter ; nothing withia the waſt Immnſity of Nature, i fo devoid of Grace, or fo remote from Sence, but will obey
the Formines of his plaſtick Heat, and feel the Operations of his vi-
vifjing Power, which, when it pleaſes, can enliven the deadeft Lump,
beautifie the vileft Dirt, 'and ſweeten the moſt offenſive Filth ; this
is « Spirit that blows where it liſts, and like the Philoſepher s Stone, converts into it felf whatſoever it touches ; Nay, the bafer, the
emptier, the obſcurer, the fouler, and the tefs ſuſceptible of Oraament
the Subject appears to be, the more is the Poet's Praiſe, who can infuſe
dignity, and breath beauty upon it, wh can hide all the natural ge-
formities ia the faſhion of bis Dreſſe, ſupply all the wants with his own
pl-nty, and by s poetical Daumonianiſm, poſſeſſe it with the ſpirit of good ſence-and gracefalneſſe, or who [.«« Horace. fays of Homer] can
feteh Light out of Smuak, Roſes out of Dunzbils, and give a kind of Life to the Inenimate, by the force of that divine and ſupernatural Virtge, which | if we will believe Ovid } is the Gift of all who are
#ruely Poets : |
Eft Deus in Nobis, agitante caleſcimus illo, Sedibus etheriis Sptritus ille venic.
There are no two things in the Worli that have a nearer affinity and reſemblance than Puctry and Painting ; the Parall.l between 'cmms runs throughout ; every Body knows the old Adage, That Poetry is Piftura loquens, and Paixtizz is Poema filens, that paints with | Words, and this ſpeaks by Colours ; nay, the very Defiaition of the one, { «s Tſþall (bow in the purſuit of this Argument | will agree #0 the other \, the Art in both is the fame, only the Tools it works with are differem. To apply this now to the preſent purpoſe; 8s in the examining of a Pitture, the Queſtion is not what is drawn, but bow the Draught is deftznid, and the colowring laid ; "tis not at all
m3 A-
ee re rr rr OOO
The Preface.. material, whether the ObjefF, that is ſet before ms; be init ſelf antia-
ble or deform'd, but whether the Painter has well or ill imitated that-
Part of Nature which he pretends to copy ;, ſo in the judging of a Pos em or Ferſes of any kind, the Subjett is uo oth:rwife conſider d, than
as it ferves to prove the truth,axd juſt ific the force of the D-fcription ;-
for «s Mr. Dryden hrs rightly obſerv'd in the Preface to bis Tyran- nick Love, There is as much of Art, and as near an Imitation of. Nature in a Eazar as ina Venus. If the Shapings be juft, and the
Trimming proper, n9 matter for the coarſeneſſe of the Stuffe ; in all
true Poetry, let the Subjedt or Matter of the Poem be in it ſelf never
fo great, or fo good, tis ftill the Faſhion that makes the V alue,” as in-
the ſelling of Filigren, men reckon more for the Work than for the Siftver. Were the Eſſayer 2s well read ix Latin Authors as be ſeems
ro be in French ; or if his Learning coudcarry him no further, | as-
T much ſuſþ:& by his Styls | wou'd he have vouchſaf d but to look ow a Tranſlation of Horace*s Art of Poetry, before he had pat out bis.
own, he mignt have fav d himſelf the ſhame of ſo fundamental a mi-. ſtake as this crude Objettion i guilty of ; where plain common ſexce- fail'd him, Horace word have inform'd him, that Poets and Pain-
ters beve been al vays allowd to repreſent whatever they won'd :
E$
-—— —— Piftoribus atque Poetis, OXD . Quidlibet audendi ſemper fuit zqua poteftas. 3
T kzow Horace brings in this as an Objettion to what be # diſcourſe.
ing, but he ſpeaks of it at the ſame time as a general Maxim, and.
owns it himfelf for an undoabted Truth, for the very next Verſe is,” - Scimus & hanc veniam petimaſq; darquſq; viciſfim.
He only reftr ains it at {aft with one Exception, which, they ſay, con- firms a Rate : |
Sed non ut placidis coeant immitia, non ut- Serpentes avibus geminentur, tigribus agnt.
The fence of which is, T grant |_ ſays He ] that Poets and Painters have an equal right to deſign and draw what they pleaſe, provided their Draughts and their Models be fram'd and governd by the nature of thinss ; they muſt nat jorn Serpents with Doves, nor Tygers _
Lambs ;
The Preface.
. . : PL « thit ©, they maſt not couple COntraries, and ſhow imp ib:
{himgeras. This is all che Cantion HOTACE gives exther to Ports of Painters ; he exemprs nothing that is natural | from the eee ts of Art, nor does he fet any thing out of the reach of Fancy, that is within the bounss of Trath. 1 know very well that ſome natural Ob- jetts we not in themſetv/ts pleaſant, nor others fit tobe eaxpos d to prb- lick View, but Decency 15 one thing, and Portry and Painting, or the hill of Drawins and D_(cribing, is another. T hive been roll, that in the late zloxiron at Whitehall, 202g oth:r Pieces was fet up the Picture of a Man fleaing, with one Arm quite nxckind, of which tho' every body diflil'd the fight, vt dia mo boay therefore dif- coutmend the Paintine.. But to come clofcr to the Efſayer's Cavit, there har not been a very famons Painter in ths World, who bas not exide either Pictures or Drawinns of M-x or Wom:n in Poſt:res and with Parts obſcene ; not one of any Note, bat like my Lord Roche- ſter he has beez guilty of baretacd Bawdry. hat aoes be think of the Hercules of Pierino del Vaga, the Venus azd the Cupid of An- nibal Caraccio, the Leda of Parmegiano, the Diana ad the An- dromeda of Titian, the fleepins Venus of Corregio, the Paris of Raphacl Urbin, azd th: Leda of Michael Angelo? Wii be fay that th:ſe great Maſter-pieces of Genius azd Skill, that have beea Orna- ments for the Cloſets of Princes, are poor Pretences ro Painting,be-
cauſe they are obſcene ? Or [ to preſſe this Argument a little further ]
will he condemn all the old Statues, that are yet remaining in th: TY orld | for the Paraliel holds here too, and his Rule reaches even them | the Labour of ſo many differeatly excelling Hands, and the Wonder of fo many years, becauſe moſt of 'cexz are not only naked but obſcene Figures? Particularly, wos'd he for this Reaſon deface the Hercules that is now at Rome iz the Palace of Farneſe, a Work more valuzble than the Capitol ? Can we hope no Quarter for that fem Apollo, 42d that ſo mach praisd Laocoon, which are plac din the Garacz of the Vatican ? Will he n3t pardon the two Alexanders that are in white Marble «pos Monte Cavallo, owe dome by Praxite- les, «nd the other by Phidias ; the Meleager | that Miracle of Art} 7 the Palace of Pichini 3 the Mars, the Orpheus, the Bacchy S, and the dyins Seneca, in the Palace of Burgheſe , with many others, [. £00 aumerons to name | that have flood ſo long the flame «nd the deſpair of gn bay __ Glory of ancieat Artiſts ; who imploy'd as the obſcene Parts a in a - rs ance P erfect and make apparent as duy other whatever ? Muſt then thefe venerable
Re-
The Preface. Relicks of Antiquity, that have efcap d the Barbarouſxeſſe o
aad Vandals, fall a Sacrifice at laſt to the groſſer and leſſe pardonable Ignorance of a whimſical Reformer ? Wou'd he have men pound 'em ro duft to humour his Caprice, or muſt we ſay that Nudities are poor Pretences to Sculpture ? We may ſay it indeed with aus much truth and juſtice, as he can ſay, that my Lord Rocheſter's Songs are nau- ſcous, or that his other obfeene Verſes are a poor Pretenceto Viit ; for none of the ancient Statuaries, none of thoſe admird Painters whom I have namid, were greater Maſters in their kind, than my Lord was in his ; none of em coud take the dir of Nature truer ; zone of "em knew how to ſhow indecent and ill-fevour d Objetts, after s more agreeable and delightful manner, nor have any of 'em grac'd their obſcene Repreſentations with « bolder ftrength , or a fuller Life. But laſtly, [_ to bring this Diſcourſe yet more hone to him, aud give Tnft ances even in Poetry it felf "| what opinion has he of Juvenal, Martial, Petronius Arbiter, Catullus, Tibullus, Ovid, zay and Horace too, whoſe Sence is often obſcene, and ſometimes their very Words ? which I mention the rather, becauſe he. ſeems to lay a great Weight upon the Barefac'dnels' of my Lord Rocheſter's Bawdry, and the downright obſceneneſs of his Expreſſion; I ſay,
what Sentence will he paſs on theſe ſo long laſting, and ever honour d
Names ? Are theſe men poor Pretenders to Wit ? Or is the Eflayer 4 poor Pretender 70 Criticiſm 2 Shall we think their Poetry, that has parſc's the Teft of ſo many Ages, or his Judgement faulty? efpe- cially wh n ve find our Underſtandings ftillown the truth of their in- ftruttive { nce, and all our Paſſions feel the Charm of their Verſifica- tion ; wh-n we find the kindeſft propenſfions of Nature, and all the ſen- febility of our Souls, waking at the Call of that celeſtial Muſick, our Cares laid xflcep, and even our Pains intermitted by the unaccountable A*r2ick of their powerful Deſcriptions. Shall we now take his word, th fach kind of Painting is not Wit, contrary #0 the opinion of all go. -riticks, that have ever been, and refuſe to be pleas'd becauſe he's 0s: of humour ? Shall we believe him | as the Papiſts do therr Prieſts | contrary to all the poſſible Evidence of Reaſon, and truft hits againſt all the certainty of Seace ? Shall we lay afide the Preſcriptions of Ariftotle, Longinus, azd Horace, contrary to the Experience of near 2000 Years, and prattife hereafter by his new Diſpenſatory ? Wil he fet up bis own Authority againſt that of all Antiquity, and op- poſe his fingle Fancy, to the unanimous Judgement of Mankind ? '{will be great, no doubt, and "OX the «b{oluteneſs of fo famous « as
* FATTY —— _ beth} hd aith s
The Pre face;
Dittator, who is giving Laws to Invention 7 . : &.-.0 þ effi? [44 11. aar Fn w _ and teachins the World to Fa.) ao NOI avary alone, thst is, obſcene Woras thromn or random like Bullies Oath, without Deſign, Order, or Dplication, i 4 poor a Pretence ro Wit, 25 tis to good 4 Cabiers * Pride", P Thh-nature . h ” h ; gl 5 OY 5 FIAC axa _— without either Genius or Learning, is to the writing of pork Eflys,| Buy be can b appro charge any of Ln s Verfes wit wch a Barrenneſs "os 2h Evidence of Fat and the : As This ; Fe BOLOY SOULS > Ro al Contrary Teſtimony "Of 4 rbole Nati wou d fly too full in hi DaPERE 0 ac of whole Nation before 0 is Uh Ban = for ; No, the chief” Crime ( as 1 jatimazed -cat Baſhfl CENT eſs of their Bawdry, which the Eflayer's go : | ulneſs zs xot able to ſuffer ; to put an end therefore £4 the Ko. un becauſe 1 believe nothing h.s fo long ſhelters the lamen- Lak: _— of his ignorant Cenſure from common Apprehen ;fions bring it to MN fratef + 7 r5ng of this Term, Wit, Tſbat atiny of a Definition, { which is the 0 to decide the matter ] and notwi Frag ory only frre way mac; Sarees 3. rthſ{tand T _— if it can bear that TW 5; 7 ya ro _ —_— rovyving _—_ - Son Notion,” that Twill be one of the fot to a hw ortiejeer, Irs Wirth 6 Pct, rpc true and lively expreſſion of | re —aigp foe morking OE Bae. mean all forts of material: Obje ts 4 F Nature F ao not only what. oever, but alſo g exert Notions and of , £ 1 T Log ine — only in the Minds of men, and is th rated Truths, fuch as . 4 : 7 | e? Y " . , Treg-roags another, in ſhort, whatever bs I _— of pra go OO of the Definition are { I think }] 6 o any kind ; 2 xpizcation , true this expreſſion of Nature P "Fs 4s not to = | pr ny Resſon, and lively that it may affet? _ "Fogafid 7 e who e matter, fo draiv and deſcribe £25 of our aſſions ; up- : m_ or things that are otherwiſe than th « Aptycote Suing f oþ Wis 4s the Ellayer does ) and colour _ ys Rar x ragbrd hi Z p; bt > = the _ Poetry ; oz the jr te rf a % _— are of any thins th. mes TY 0 Mare 4 VEY Poetry as Paintine whe Th ery exiſts, is the perfettion as well f Pay ans brick fete Ar Aeon Ar mm will ferve both, and allo izcl ke notice, re ” which has the ſame geperal End, and Ones es Art of. Seaip- T. : , 5 'r It x purkny: mon, which T have here propos'd. , if the Eflayer diflite ar Exceptions 10 it, T ſhall fell Fo a, when he makes his partt- er ciear it, and (how that there is
a9-
The Preface: ,
zothing either in the ancient-or modern Wit, but what it comprehend- ed within it ; or if he thinks he can give a juſter himſelf, when what he ſhall offer, appears to be fo, 1 am fo perfettly well ſatisfy d of the goodaefs of my Cauſe, he will fiad me always ready to joyn iſſue with him, either apon that or any otber.. Jn the meantime. let um compare his Criticiſm with this, aud ſee how out of' Countenance, and how fimply* twill then look 5, it runs thus ; Bawdry barefac'd ( ſays he) is a poor Pretence to Wit, that is, Bawdry barefac'd 1s a poor Pretence to a true and lively Exprefſion of Nature.
Riſum teneatis Amici ?
No Reader can be fo dull as not preſently to perceive the barefac'd Contradiftion, and fee the tranſparent folly of this Aſſertion ; there needs now 20 long Train of Diſcourſe, nor any far-fetch'd Arguments ro refitte it ;, *tis a piece of ſelf-evident Nonſence, [ T can give it no other Name without we it ] and Blunder at firſt Fekg 3 for why an obſcene Aition may not be d:fcrib'd, or an obſcene Imagination expreſs, truly and lively, or why either of "em is not capable of the Graces of corrett Verſification, as well as any other thing, is for ever unintelligible. : |
But becauſe ſome may be apt to ſuſpett, how little ground: foever they have for it, that T have fram'd this Definition on purpoſe zo make the Eflayer's Notion ridiculous ; if” he believes his Cauſe wall fare the better, for being remov'd into another Court, 1 am not only willing to gratifie him in this Particular, but ſhall carry it tobe try'd even there where the Judge is bis Friend ; I ſhall afreſh examine his Criticiſm by a Definition of Wit, which Mr. Dryden has given ac, whoſe J:dgement in. any thing that relates to Poetry, T ſuppoſe, he will not diſpute, and whoſe Arbitration | if we may meaſure his Con- fidence in him by his Obligations to him | he has no manner rh Reaſon to aculine.. The Definition I mean, is in the Preface to his Opera, call d the State of Innocence ; the words are thefe—— Wit ( ays Mr. Dryden ) 1s a Propriety of Thoughts and Words Or Thoughts and Words elegantly adapted to the Subjett. The jud:ciors Reager will eaſily obſerve, that this Definition, the it differ in fcund, is much the fame in fence with mine ; what Mr. Dryden calls Propriety, T have call d true Expreflion, and that [ elegantly adapted ] iz the explication of his, anſwers direitly to what T intend by | lively } iz mine, fo that Ny T remember'd that | which 1 _
2 not
The Preface.
_ —_ fo rot *) onn, T fhoud aot have f fa [ this eftaitiop foget her , and tr wh bu riticiſas 7 and Mr mak way ey xo wil Bar on oſt A ecies of Ablurdity efacd 52 mo Pretence ; we ruſt then read It ths _ — -He that £43 make ſeoee + OPT ety of Thoughes tr -" = = {0 ofeſ Impoſſibilities in # up repoſition, may go defed# it has ipathies in Nature. Bawdry anHar0n, 4nd re- pee" jetted pay ng” want Propriety ; thu is : 7 barefacd, whatever the Thoughts wo” oxgo nice Gentlemen as the Ela fault that afes they wow are too: Lobo: a6 VIE, rhe anions cede food, + « propers and fo eapreſſe of br Bawdry barc World that comes ag #0 this Defwition, the 76 fac. zearer the nature of W T2 at drones ot foquice mile the Ik Erhat Theve been allthis while ple fign of this Diſco: « « thing in it ſelf (. is while pleading the C courſe, as W4SWEUVET 177 7 elf [. and upon all occa 5 OE Cauſe of Bawd part of the Queſh thoughts, and far ng ] allowable and fit ; 4 , for "rs 5 atone) the Eſa [ rag my WEANING 2 _ . pg HS lacky a Run zndecent and immora "4 F and me ;, He brands not on ding, 4; e has at Criticiſm he ut for being unvitty ; -— 1g, 4nd beins bi , when he truſt . 3 fo ua- Pr etend to ff gt nf elf hut a Stran 2 his own Under jt aſhes afar others the we ; he frouagh upon Parnaſſus, will need, didts par th + elſe is unfit, but his RB. indeed that Bawdry in _ ON En ee Ty; Appetite, hat Poor Pretence ro Wit outh, but becaufe [& he a ; all that 1 ha: ow Engliſh, pak py ry” Criſing the Wi tpnagrtake ' AtjURES 3t, DECAuſe 1 tk Vie of Lorie fee Wren Fre rr tinent fo at oth {Hg it may be {o F THY Sy not the Man EE and : OEDET FLINES it 1: DH1mes unſee ab Mrs > « the Civlia mw; we bil's apr ns rg Hong, ne ayer fatum nl - 4 #NCEROR abby +: it, and we may ths 6 =p mhich tho it "s of #h7s nathre 15 m TR,” Quod fieri n Ba Wit witho mich the beſt h 7 Lord Rocheſter on debet, ut the leaſt Allay ei that ever w s obſcene Poetry Wir mtkou the ot Aly ther of Fane is Fitiun, net — Gareties of rs the Extravagancie atneſſe or Fuſt A, 4n f his Pen Tancies of his Tonth ian, muſt yet ve » when he was car 5 Tonth, and the a T7
that Liber fpiri | I i I1ritu + 23 x R PLIritus, as Petronius cl 1a avey with the precipitancy of alls it, the 100 7 precipirancy oj great fervonr of his
FIELIS
'The Preface.
univerſal Genius, and the overfruitfulntſs of an unbounded Fancy. But tho his obſcene Poetry cannot be direttly juſtified, in point of De- cency, it may however be a little excusd, and where it cannot chal. lenge Approbation, it may perhaps deſerve Pardon, if we conſider not only when "tas writ, but alſo to whom 'twas addreſs d ; for as thoſe Painters I m:ntiona before, tho they liv'din Popiſh Countreys, did not, T ſuppoſe, intend their obſcene Pieces for the ſervice of the Church, or to be ſet np at the Market-Crofs, but probably for the ſe- cret Apartments of ſome particular Perſons, who cond look unſcanda- liz'd oa a Skilful Imitation of any thing that was natural, with the freedom and the reflexion of Philoſophers ; fo neither did my Lord Rocheſter defigz thoſe Songs the Eſſayer i fo offended with, to be ſang for Anthems i» the King*s-Chappel, any more than he did his other obſcene Writings ( however they may have been fince abasdY for the Cabinets of” Ladies, or the Cloſets of Divines, or for any pub- lick or common Entertainment whatever, but for the private Diver- fion of thofe happy Few, whom he a#d to charm with his Company, and hozour with bis Friendfhip. .
As to the Eflayer's calling my Lord's Songs nauſeous, beſides what has been already anſwer'd, he cannot but know that my Lord writ « great number, without the leaſt obſceneneſſe in 'em, which are not on- ly far better than any he is capable.of making, ( for to ſay no more of 'ems were t0-praife 'em poorly ) but fo corrett, and yet ſo natural, fo eafily wrought, and ſo juſtly finiſhd, with that elegant Aptneſſe in the - Words, and that unordinary Beauty in the Thoughts, as no other mar ever did or can exceed. Es
Hu laſt Exceptica to my Lord's Poetry, is that the grofſe Obſcene-
nee of it palls inſtead of railing Appetite, where he finds fault with hat only thing, that {| were his Exception juſt ] woud excuſe it 16: much the major part of Mankind ; for that which chiefly makes Baw- dry ia fo ill Repute; is becauſe it has been always believ'd an Incentive ro ſuch D-fires, as Divines tell us, ſhoud rather be curb d than exvou- r.4g'd, and apt to bring Thoughts into peoples Heads, which ought not, and perhaps oth-rwiſe never wou'd come there ; now if: barefac'd Biwvdiy has this particular property, that it does not hint theſe forbid- den Thoughts, nor ftir thoſe unlawful Deſires, but on the contrary flattens and ftifles *em, *tis much more innocent, and confequently fit- zer to be us'd, or at leaſt to be pardon'd, than any other. But te's- &«fide the Cuſpion again, ard as wid: here of the Mark he aims at, as: he was before ; there are indeed ſcarce more Lines than a Gp" z78: 3s:
————————_ 0 Ny 4
The Preface.
this half Paragraph, that concerns 15 Lord Rocheſter ; he cannot _ fee [it ſeems} at all but by other men's Eyes, for he ſtumbles at eve- ry Step, when he ventures 10 walk without his Guiders However tet i take a view of this his legitimate Seace n his own Dreſſe ; the
Lines are theſe :
Bat obſcene Words too grofſe to move Defire, © Like heaps of Fuel do but choak the Fire. That Author's Name has undeſerved Praiſe, Who palld the Appetite he meant to raiſe.
| Tn the firſt place, What does that ed in undelerved do there? 1 know no buſineſſe it has, unleſſe it be to crutch a lame Verſe, and each out a ſeanty Sence ; for the Word that is now usd is undelervd. 1 ſbow'd not take notice of fo trivial « thing as this, but that I have to do with « Giver of Rules, and a magiſterial Correiter of oth-r men, th? upon the obſerving of ſuch little Niceties, does all the Muſick of Numbers depend ; but the Refinement of our Verification is a ſort of Criticiſm, which the Efſayer | if we may judge of his Knowledge by his Prafice} ſeems yet to learn, for never was there ſuch a Pack of feiff ill-founding Rhimes put together as his Ellay is ftuff d with ; to add therefore to his other Colleltions, tet him remember hereafter that Vi erſes have Feet given em, either to walk, graceful and ſmooth, and ſometimes with Majeſty and State, like Virgil's, or to run, light and eafie, like Ovid's, not to ftand ftock-ftill like Dr. Donne's, or to hobble like indigeſted Proſe ; that the counting of the Sylables zs the leaſt part of the Poet's Work, in the turning either of a ſoft or a ſono- Tons Line ; that the eds went away with the for-to's, azd the untils y_ general Rout, that fell on the whole Body of the thereons, the
4 reins, ard the therebys, when thoſe uſeful Expletives the al TNOS and the untos, and theſe moſt convenient Synalzphas ; 'midf{t mongft, gainſt, and Twixt, were EVEry One cut off . hich ar Y rat _ youu d _ the pas extirpation of the ancient F/T;
Hereols 4azd the therefiroms, &c. Nor is this R 4 the arbitrary Fanc :y of a few, who —_— Ewa —_ nions aud Pratti es impoſe their own private Opi- ox the Authority of ;* Tania fo rod Countreymen, but groun '
Je) , (1 in his Epiſtle de Arte Poe-
WD ſe is the fral Jaige of Language, [the Ferſorn ana os the common Reaſon of Man as and obſolete Iitems of
oy CEL hr,
too well known to need quotin 4 ]
Eind, which forbids us thoſe axtiquated Wor
The Preface. Speech, whoſe Werth ! :::> has worn ont, how well ſoever they may
 ſeemto ſtop a G9 i i” 5/-, and ſuit our ſbapeleſſe imm boy Coney
tions ; for what « grovn pedantick and unbecoming win "tis ſboke, will not have a jot the better grace for being writ down.
In the n:xt place, To what purpoſe does he keep ſuch a pudder here bout moving, Deſire, azd raiſing Appetite ? Does he think that
- all kindof obſcene Poetry is defisnd to rarle Appetite ? Does he nob +
know that obſcene Satyre | of which nature are moſt of myLord Ro- cheſter's obſcexe Writings, and particularly ſeveral of his Songs | his a quite different end, and is fo far from being intended to raiſe, that the whole force of it ts generally turnd to reftrain Appetite, and keep it within due Bounds, to reprove the unjuſt Deſigns, and check the Exceſſes of that lawleſſe Tyrant. If therefore ſome of my Lord Rocheſter's Soxgs ſhoud miſſe « Mark, which they neither did, nor 0:42 ht to aim at, T believe no body but the Eſſayer will think it a Fault. But to ftrike at the root of his Objettion, what does he mean by ſay- tag, That obſcene Words are too groſſe to move Delire ? he might ſay with as much fence, that piows Words are too good to move Devo- tron ; ti impoſſible that any Words (hou'd come too near the _—_ the things they are to repreſent, when the defion is to touch our Paſſt- ons by that repreſentation, for if there be an attraition of any fort in the nature of the things, the more truly they are deſcribd to us, the
more is that attrative virtue drawn forth, and made to exert it
ſelf; ſo that what he calls groſſeneſle, is here the chief Fares the main weight and ſtamp of the Poets Expreſſion, by which a juſt and. full Notion of what he woud have us apprehend, is more clearly and? more forcibly impreſs d npon the Imagination ,, Propriety being | ar T have already fhow'd } the very Eſſence of Wit, and the only poſſible wap #o win the Under ſtanding, and engage the Aﬀettions of a ratio- nal Creature. 'Tis true, [ as Thinted once before } obſcene Words- us'd unneceſſarily, and with 2s Little pertinence, as ſome of our mo- dera Enthufiafts ufe godly Phraſes and Scripture Expreſſrons, when: fix of *em ſometimes ſhall ſizaifie but one thing, | if by great chance- they fiznifie any thing ] will provoke indeed the wrong way,. and nau- feate inſtead of affeiting ; but if a man of Wit has the ranging and/ applying of the one, and a man of Learning and Judgement the other,
both will operate according to their natural tendency ; that is, theſe the Cafe is this ; all depends npon the Genius and Art of the Writer,,
for as an obſcene Thought, if it be not livelily painted, will 5 we 4 {mal
URIC
The Preface.
or verhaps no eff: upon the Mind of the Reader, according gage tes. of fee wy the Expreſſion, fo a chaff Or 4 prom? Meditation, if it has the [ame diſadvantage, will work as little. Thus [ 20 come to hisown Allufion ] Heaps of Fuel, when they are careleſly thrown on, and after a diſorderly manner cramm'd together, do 30 doubt choak and dead a Fire, but if they are regularly laid, and artifi- cially pil d up, they will 4s much enliven and increaſe it, 4 Demozſtra- tion of which he may ſee every Twenty ninth of May iz « Bonefire ; ris not then the Heaps or Quantity of Fuel, but the unskilful placing, that puts out the Fire. VVe may therefore with a very little trouble turn the ſmall Shot of his Simile upon him, for adding but 4 word or two it will ſpeak a dirett comrary fence, as thus,
But obſcene VVords, if right apply'd, raife and inflame Defire, As Heaps of Fuel, plac'd with 5kill, make and maintain the Fire.
For 4 farther Proof of this, when his ſqueamiſh Fit is over, 1 wow drecommend to his Peraſal, Aloifia ſigea, or if that be too hard for him, becauſe tis writ in Latin, {et himread, I'Efſcole des Filles, and if the obſcene VVords and Deſcriptions he will meet with there, do wot raiſe his Appetite, the VVorldwill be apt to conclude it, not only wery dull, but abſolutely dead, and as bad as his Poetry is, bis Rea- der will be better entertaind than his Miſtreſs.
If T were now of a humour to pleaſe my ſelf with finding other men's Faults, it were zo hard matter to make the Elayer give my Lord Ro- cheſter his Revenge. T fſboud then ask him from what Ballad he fook that Heroical height of Expreſſion, and that noble Tarn of a Ferfe, which we find in the firſt Page of his Efſay,
| None there are That can the leaft with Poetry compere.
How fong Cadance and Foibles have been Engliſh words ? Or whe- Fg
deſpairing to get any Credit by his VVit, he fpeaks French like rhe Kings of Brentford, to ſhow his Breeding A uw he who in Page the qth. thinks it ſo eaſteto rob the Ancients, will ftoop fo low 4s iu moſt of the following, to borrow from the Moderns ? VV by he foffers a Muſe, n ho has ; fowr a Countetance, and ungraccful a Faſbiou as bis, to play the VVag, and be fach amo ry Grig, as ſhe Sometimes aims to appear ? Or in plain terms, nit is the meaning
of
The: Preface.
of all that fored: infipid Raillery,, that fills- 3 xBtlt Pags* kF v2ore dull hag 7 pr 76 © ſhow d/o Hye vis HOAd by what new Grammar he conftrues the fix aft Lines of bY YthsPade' And when we may hope to kno.v from him, what the Cor eqath - WP be, if in an Elegy
A juſt Coherence be not made Between each Thought, &C.
For he has left it at preſent, as Mr. Bayes did his Plot, for the Rea- der to find out of himfelf, if he will ; and ſome have been gueſſing, that tis much the ſame, as when in an Eflay the tike Coherence #5 or abſervd. Laſtly, how comes his Eagle i» Page the 11th. which we expetted by the pompous preparation, wou'd preſcntly have mounted out of fizht, to fly fo like a Buzzard, and flounce like a Filh ? But tis no oreat Wonder, T confeſſe, that an Eagle, who ſeems afraid to get upon her Wings, and warity conſiders the Perils of her Caſe ix fo doing, which by the way & a Phraſe fitter for an Aﬀidavit than 4 Poem, and as natural an Image, as if he had deſcribd a Man afraid zo walk ; but, T ſay, tis not at all ſtrange, that ſuch a cautious Eagle, - who s fo diftruſt ful of her Wings, ſhou'd keep fo near the Ground in her Flight. — —_— Ts, eafie as twoud perhaps be pleaſant, to enlarge this poetical Catechiſm, for there is yet good flore of Materials left ; but this little may ſuffice at preſent, to give the World a T afte Fd zhe Eſſayer's, Abilities, and how fit he ts to corrett my Lord Rocheſter, or to teach #s ; for I find this Preface # already run out beyond the OYAERGY Y Levgth of ſuch Diſcourſes, nor was it at all intended | this being not worth the trouble ] to blaſt « Wit, which will die of it ſelf in alittle time, but to do Right to that, which is likely to live as long as our Language, and defend a Man, whoſe Perſon I was ever naturally in- cliz'd to low?, and whoſe Friendſbip TI ſhall upon all occaſions be proud to own ; a Maa, whoſe Wit cou'd never have wanted the affiftance of mine, 2or a much better, exther to recommend or juſtific it, were not that Part of his Writings the Ellayer has cenſur d, of ſuch an unhap- Hed, as few will examine ; otherwiſe, as to what concerns the Poetry of *em, they are their own beſt Encomium and Defence, wo Body being able to fay fo much for "em as they do for agg beg To conclude, Whatever Faults my Lord Rocheſter might have, 1 en confident the Eſlayer is the only Perſon in the Kingdoms wh TC Wor
U——
The: Preface.
| be App wone ever
laufe - &
7
eeab
in bix Wit
for 'ens AHA
»
#0 look
2 on, cry'd ir,
bat thoſe w
"4
: ome EVEY
FY þ. TWIT Ive T4 "r BTTT T4 k +3, MSESS 24.14 PIT SR FT TO . Fi : i * - - £3 = T # . o , 1 o * Sh gf - { , Fe - * * - + : s oF . "od , - W- - a Ld e . 1 4 4 ' 4 £/ P G4 s 5 . . i ww - -* s - |: 7 © > ” _ * ' - , - 0 by, _ % ol Ln 5 . hd C : - P F-» _— » L449 * Y we F-" ani, " i ws . i .* L R - , »+ L i » . ; E 7 - [2 # F w 4<,- V z ' £400" C - e ” Fee. + F þ *# FF * F 19 ? i ay" o *, . # / . et 3” 01 "Y” # = $3.4 . * F [3 F Jo +: . ® M z 3 4 o'®, _ os, g: 4M "HF - we 7% LAT: : \ nf LS PTS | c 3 ge . - be 64,09, 74 [1 2% | ed. H * FI a& -- Ct D ll a * - wo 7» : { ' £ bp > ” þ / * L - , ' TEM -i tied a * ' a3 _ ' * #4 Ll > * -” #'> « «Y bl — I. . 4 Ll T7 ” . 2 L ® * . F n Faw 4 j 4 4, nh my
: SIP
TOW. Top ror ee, ft {1 FPS RE-USE 1 2
a Bet O70 ORIYA
0 __— — — — — — — — _ — — — —_— —_— — — : , 4 .
- Y * 4 L: ae ed et ob toned bs le ha Mock _
Prologue ſpoken by Mrs. Cook che 5s nyo eo
no «0 4 % Sy
Written by Mr. Beks. CEE
TI that aſſurance we to as addreſs, (A : As ftandard Beaaties, certain-of Caeeſoows ARID = With careleſs Pride at once they charmand wex”” © S590 tans
And ſcorn the little Cenſares of their Sex. | | Sare of the anregarded Spayl, deſpiſe \ >. ont den ninth.
The needleſs Aﬀettation of the Eyes, © Vs EIS The ſoftening Lenguiſhment ther famch ms anne Oo \ xt Ko But truſt alone to their refifllofs Charms.) ©. (St »iG IN v4 ®. *I So we fecur'd by undiſputed Wit, |
Diſdain the damning Malice of the Pit,
Nor need falſe Arts to ſet great Natureeff, © I =o Ef Or fudied Tricks to force the oo and x F |
Te VVou d-be-Critichs, you ate ll widone,. 5. <:1 oh For here's no Theam for you to work upon. © .
Faith ſeem to tath to Jenny; Ladviſeg' 2 - 5 6 - 6 who, likes who, then Loq hers me Rk :
ry theſe hard Times hog to abate the Neve g6i RITES CHER Tell her how cheap were Lenfels bn thedee) cn ot IL "rv 254 6h "Monet Cir VV3 zwes, aid Daughters rMhetcome oh. *Iywan 1
How far « Guinny went «t Blanket-Fair. + | Andes i Thwus you may find ſome g ved Excuſe for Faling . .- has SIE”
Of your beloved Burch of: 4 caAL 'D
k.
That when Friend cryes — How. did the Plo fuel? - 33408 Ab, Deme, Þ hardly minded —what they did;”. | LIE gh BYY
VVe ſhall not your Ili-nature pleaſe ro dey, Per 41.2, "vo IL
VVith fome fond Scriblers new uncertain Play, ', 5:52 at SEAS Looſe as vain Touth, and zedious as dull Age, OE E IAG Or Love and S——_ that ore-runs theStege. TE, % wo ot SAEL » Fam'd and ſubſtantial Authars gave. this Areas, . * 7 LA av uy I8Y!
And "twill be ſolemn, Noble all andGreiz:.”: fn \ ie
o
VVit, facred VVit, is all the bus neſs here, - © FI. _n \ RP
Great Fletcher, and the Greater Rocheſter. ou =D
Now name the hardy Man one fault dares find, - KEE Tre 1n the vaſt VVork 7 two fuck IPG)" 3 Ls 0492 a ED TY bel Y OE *, AY * &35 a3 f
AD SIPEIIT
'C 2
—_— — —
on*s ſoft and pow'rful VV it Ne wake _—  eetcher writ. Difere their heav'nly Notes ; yet both agree To make az angie Harmony. Liften ye Virgins to his charming Song, Eternal Muſick dwelt upon bis Tongue. The Gods of Love angV Vit inſpir a his Pen, And Love and Beautywas this glorious Theam.
Now Ladies you may celebrate his Name, VVithout « ſcandal on your ſpotleſs Fame. VVith Praiſe his dear laxrd Memory purſue, = And pay his Death, what to his Life was daee*
_ - En. 4 0
Prologue to PALE N F [IN FAN. |
Spoken by Mrs. Cook theſccond Day.
; 'F3 S not your eaſineſs to give Applauſe, | This long hid Jewel to publich dravs Our matchleſs y Ser, whotoKVie gave Rates, Scoxns Prasfe, that has been profbiture #6 Fools. To: fattions Favour, the fole Prop and Fence Of Hackney-Scriblers, he quits aff Pretence, C And for their Flatteries brings you Truth and Sence. pes we our ſetves confeſs ta be unfit For ſuch fide-Boxes, and for fach a Pit. To the fair Sex ſome Complement were due, Did they not flight themſelves in liking you ; How can they here for Judges be thought fir, V'Uho daily Jour ſoft Nowfetce bake for V's; Do oz your ill bred Noiſe for Humor. doat, And chooſe the Man by the embroider'd Coat ? Our Author lov/'d the youthful and the fa, But even 13 thoſe their Follies could wot ſore A Bid them diſcreetly uſe their preſent ftore, © Be Friends to Pheaſare, when they pleaſe no more -
uf
Defir'd the Ladies of matarer Apes, ; Hi If ſome — Spark their Hearts enrages, C Yr At home to quench their Ember with their Pages.
Pert , patch'd, and painted, there fo ſpend ther days MV BEIT 4-2 : |
Net crowd the fronts of Boxes at new Plays : $662 | | Advis'd young fighing Fools to be more preſſing, £570 IT | And Fops of Forty to give over dreſſing.” © By this he got the Envy of the Age, © © No Fury's like a libelPd Blockhead's Rage.
Hence fome deſpis'd him for his want of VVir,
And others faid he too obſcenely writ. ; | Dull Niceneſs, exviow of | Mankind"s Delight, Abortive Pang of V anity and Spite! © © to © It ſhows « Maſter's Hand, "rwas Virgil's Praiſe,
Things low and abje# to adorn and raiſe. © P The Sun ow Dunghils ſhining is as bright, © As when his Beams the faireſt Flowers invite, $ | But all weak Eyes are hurt by too much Light.  =BE - Let then theſe Owls againſt the Eagle preach,  - And blame thoſe Flights which they want VVing to reach.
Like Falftafte let 'em conquer Heroes dead,
And praiſe Greek Poets they cou'd never read.
Criticks ſbould perſonal Quarrels lay afide,
The Poet from the Enemy divide. ' os:
*T was Charity that made our Author write, | = A, For your Inftruition *tis we AT to night ; - EN EO
: For ſure no Age was ever known before,
VF anting an Acius and Lacina more.. - - _
Prologue intended for Y ALENTINI 4N, ES to be ſpoken by Mrs. Barrey. WIDE (
On world you have me rail, ſwell, and look bie, Like rampant Tory over conchant Whig, As ſpit-fire Bullies ſwagger, ſwear, and roer, Azad brandiſh Bilbo, when the Eray # ore. | Moſt
ba S— - — —_
So i * ”. <IEUDIUESII PPE Ing wie hr andy CR a os wt nan 6 « =. = EEE SID IoGD w—_ J FL , : {Ki L
—_ PIES <= -=Y — = _—_
-—
————— —_— —  ——
0 - Slpanut mms ants. I = yo —— 1 - 1.223 my ta > aro) : , , 4 y 4 - = + + DE DEE 9 A MIA abs + TP IO i #56 Wy 1a - _ i ——_— 4 T — s a __-_— a a... a _ . - > _ Lhd
Myft we huff ow when were 0, pos d by none ? reſorts Y muſt fierce on thoſe wh are down. Shall 1 jeer Poptſh Plots that once did fright ws, And with moſt bitter Bobs taunt little Titus ? 'Or with ſharp Style, 03 ſueaking Trimmers fall, - Who civilly themſetves-Prudential call? "Tet Witlings to true Wits 46, ſoon may rife, As « prudential Man can ere be wiſe. . No, even the worſt of all yet Twill ſpare, The nauſeoiu Floater, changeable as Air, . A naſty thing, which on the ſurface rides, Backward end forward with all turns of T ides. An Audience { will not Jo courſely uſe; _ "Ts the lewd way of every common Mule. Les Grubſtreet- Pens ſuch mean Diverſion find, | But we have Subjefts of « nobler kind: — ' We of legitimate Poets fing the praife, —. - No linto th ſplriou Heof theſe dps. . But ſuch as with deſert their Laurels gain'd, - And by true Wit inumortal Names obtainfd. Two like Wit-Conſuls raPd the former Ape, 3 With Love, and Henoar gras'd that flouriſhing Stage, And Fevery Paſſion aid t Mind engage. Is et They ſweetneſs firft into our Language brought, They all the Secrets of man's Natare ſought, - And laft ing Wonders they have in conſunttion wrong ht.
Now joyns 4 third, a Genius 4 ſublime * As ever fouriſh'd in Rome's þ _ Lime... As ſparply could he wound, «s ſweetly engage, | As foft bis Love, andas divine his Rage. | ws volt erat” Virgins to delight, | And with his Style did fierceſt Blotkheads friobr. - Some Bur Bel +a ft lockbeads frig hr. ugh now demi, heve felt his pow's And langaiſhd in the ea of rol okay ans,
; But for ye Fops, his Satyr reach ye all, - Under his Laſh your whole vaſt Herd did fall. -Obh fatal lofs ! that mighty Spirit*s gone L bas 1-his too great heat went out $09 ſoon !
- Nor break
dre daily to invade the
ener n———rnrnnmn ern
So fatal Is it veſt to excel ; Thus young, thus mourw 4, his lev Lacretivs fn.) }
And now ye little Sparks who infeft the Pit, PI OT Learn all the Reverente due to AW, Wit. £ Ry
Diftarb not Sanya empty aoiſe each Bench,” ) Nor in chat See Scene of Fops, the Gallery, ©
Fent your No-wit, and ſpurious Railtery : | IF TVET:
That yo Place, where yeet all ſors of vols; VIDE Tour huge fat Lovers, and conſumptive Fools, ef 23> Half fs, and Gemefter f5 ax F4 fp , ws Y <KUZLIN. erows ;
vetafters, OBOE | Go
And all ye little Brood of
_ Amend and learn to write yu theſe your m_ + ET —— | ny | % - wall
bi ey 4
% S 4 $4- = (1 14 2» 5 "og A aa Oo at 4 _ FX
«7 » awd £12119216 avi25.Þ ) OI
vail vault
Ls. owes wb
Ea p 3 dad. : , 209: ra iioming rage \ ir | ) Piban. ; C
Fl
AN" IS RINK
- Ly # S 6h Py * »- + | - q » Era» Þ iS i). £ 449713 <4 Y
$ ty £: x
-
awdy Teſts to th Orange-wench ; RES) ©
Bs
TENEY
- __
US LAS
ds —— — © —_—_—C__ w—__ PROS I 27 en 0 HT VETO WRT ag maapopyt >= UL En x mf Eran On WTO PAT TT —
SC)” PRRRAERETIRE'Y vf
F abs mAb of ep trendy ren
% #*
L
i3}
A 4 Fob 0 [ 6-6." ," . 4 4 a » - Es PD, "4 | _ \ Ll Ll ® z Fi [: 3 - <* Fr-4 | ' ' y - A 6 - , 4 aw , JA £ - p | vs me . I 328.::.66 "Re - po oo L2G © | om 4 oy 4p oy 1 0, 4 py / 4 , * 61) e: 6 T = fl ; A '-? ; * 6 0 od - :, = H 2 » tf | "Hops - put X Roh _.-.* Gy A s ' 5 | q
Chylax :
tothe Court.
-
Lewd Women
LY .and Seryan
©" OI reg 3 tc 1s nad A M———— atatat=>—cepteecetem=—mcemmtinniaei ” Ry nee I 2007 Rt; tm 1" PERI TR HET OTH 9CITTI RIATeT Es n_"w a4 wail
to {Eve
Fri
— ——
—— +—_— —_—
LN " bo . = "NT" 4 ” F oy OS , _ hg fs _ t, F ,
| ' 1 | Fe ot s z n + 1 4d + d : ! . RET eve: CR 8A, + ; SAY OE NOITTIIENTT ION TTY COST Mt + - $6.4 {Boch 26h} apa; ae ; : wen : OgE ' 4
\ Pe? t ELSY 1
THE
TRAGEDY,
VALENTI NIA N.
—
ACT. L: SCEN. L
The Curtain flies up with the Maj ck, of Tonic |
and Kettle-Drums ; and diſcovers the Em peror thr, oo the Garden, Attended with a great Court. # ond Mateo ah
flay behind.
Maximus. - fcins. Max. gReat isthe Honour, which! our Emperor _
Does by his frequent Viſits throw on Maximas;. . | =
Not leſs than thrice this Week has his Gay-Court, | With all ns Splendor ſhind within my Walls : SRI IN Nor ddes this glorious Sun beſtow his Beams =... Upon barren Soyl, My happy Wite, CEE IN Fruitful in Charms for Fake tax "Es Crowns the ſoft Moments of each welcome Hour, .
With ſuch vAruty of ſucceflive Joys,
Ci 14: ref: FT OQOVE WHICH 2! 22!
en ©
For the Enjoyment of a Minute More, While I
o CO —_ —  — EN — —
. V [0] | 34 a4! - — o 1 0/9: _ = 2— — — = - ks ® »
He willingly monk give his Empire up.
BEET 2 The T R A G E D Y of HP Made glorious through the Merit of my Wue, HRT Am at the Court ador'd as much as She, Shaft As if the vaſt Dominion of the World ih ji He had Exchang'd with me for My Luczna. TELE Ecius. I rather wiſh he would Exchange his Paſſions, 1 it Give you his Thirſt of Love for yours of Honour. B43: And leaving you the due poſſeſſion JLELE Of your juſt Wiſhes 1a Lucina's Arms, T6” FH Think how he may by force of Worth and Virtue, Tat: Maintain the Right of his Imperial Crown, '* Wy. Which he negle&s for Garlands made of Roſes; $2148 Whilſt, in diſdain of his il-guided Youth, BPUIAE Whole Provinces fall off, and fcorn to have [lab Kb Hymn for their Prince, who is his Pleaſures Slave. mal * Max. I cannot blame the Nations, Noble Friend, TE: - For falling oft fo faſt from this wild man, 164 | When, under our Allegiance be it ſpoken, Fi. And the moſt happy Tye of our Afﬀetions, 10h The whole World groans beneath him : By the Gods, TEL Ide rather bea Bondſhve to his Panders, Wl Conſtrain'd by Power to ſerve their vicious Wills, ; ; #; t Than bear the Infamy of being held IH A Favourite to this fowl flatterd Tyrant. HO mon lives Vertue, IE: |: onour, Difcretion, Wiſdom 2 f Tk; And choſen to the Nuning of LB oh = et i But Whores and Bawds and Traitors! Oh m LEct TEL The Glory of a Souldier, and the Truth ——_ 14/846 Of men made up for Goodneſs fake, like ſhells Pt Grow to the rugged Walls for want of Adtion 2k > your happy {elf and I that love you, : 1 "1! | png tho' theſe Truths Dory = > ro hea IRR | t leaſt a little Mendin | Hl .. e = but Pho ar" Ne OO - MH O What 15 done, ; *=e } A fra ang bk for what's ll done, ; » Lhe Hearts of Prin peoebing the Temples of the Gods: pure oP | (Till fome vu oj be G5 ' tallow'd Hands defi their Offerings,) | LA Burns
Burns ever there. We muſt not put 'em out - Becauſe the Prieſts, who touch theſe Sweets are wicked. We dare not, Deareſt Friend ; Nay more, we cannot (While we conſider whoſe we are, and how, To what Laws bound, much more to what Lawgiver, While Majeſty is made tobeobey'd ; And not enquird into. Max. Thou beft of Friends and Men, whoſe wiſe infiruCtions * Are not leſs charitable, weigh but thus much, Nor think I ſpeak it with Ambition , For by the Gods 1 do not. Why my Acias, Why are we thus? or how became thus wretched ? Zcius. You'l fall again into your Fit. Max. 1 will not _ Or are we now no more the Sons of Romaxs, No more the followers of their mighty Fortunes ! But conquer'd Gaz!s, And Quivers for the Parthians : Why is the Emperor, this Man we honour, | This God that ought to be, | ZEcius. You are too curious. | Max. Give me leave ——Why is this Author of us 2 __ ZEcius. 1 dare not hear you ſpeak thus. Max. T1 be modeſt, Thus led away, thus vainly led away, And we beholders/ Miſconceive me not, I ſow no Danger in my Words ; but wherefore And to what end are we the Sons of Fathers Famous and faſt to Rowe ! Why are their Virtues
Stampt in the Dangers of a thouſand Battels, Their HonoursTime vut-daring
I think for our Example.
ZEcius. You ſpeak well. .-
Max. Why are we Seeds of thoſe then to ſhake hands With Bawds and baſe Informers? Kifs Diſcredit, And Court her like a Miſtreſs > Pray your leave yet, You! fay tt'Emperor's young, and apt to take Impreſſion from his Pleaſures,
Yet even his Errors have their good Effe&s, For the ſame gentle temper whuch inclines X His Mindto Softneſs, does his Heart defend
B 2 From
FRE IV ?
—
————y— de
4 - pon, PR... 4 - = rata =_ 1 Sh 4 Der 3... _- | ” - = _ 2 "_ Fo 4 ds 208 | 5 En ns - = - : — pan _ Oo © = 75.7" 0 pt Tm —_— * -1 Me, ws | A 2 TOE {. —_ : — "- - 7 , Ta ? , / 4 - nt pt my bn —e— —— - - I q E G kia, 4 = * : B7NF--21 "= . :
$f 4 $he, nw. Ian mry N = OS yy I Ahy.; <4 99 cones A —— wen . — 2 2-4-4, Apt 37 NIE? = —__—Yy , by 75g i a__— Ste, _— : ; _ 4-146 85 =<w. oe :=1 Zr =_ —_—_ _ nas 4 = —_= ap-orgr_— ot - im I - >. - Ll + 4 tm __ 2 $90? ---+- | St; _ "i: -
- 4 "i TE? - F mh. 5 ee eas: - a ot bg O Sonia 143 4 inet of _ , EW. mote” *. Gat: 24426 ts pp thr n ji" EPI - mY CENSLNG a ww Wis ; v4 "<1 Aa * L pebunpootent} nem gry hy: + «Ws. Pas Be op can, "7 TREE GET EIS oi oo ge 1 or rar yn omen wr ennh Lu = = - —_ —_— P _ 42s hbeth ea inte 11 1þ my - = * AN ia ome y r] ry hp apap rant ant 4 "OAPI: op. - For net - 2cogroegps_ m7 95.4 ——_— - - 0% 4 a _ bo. b 1 : ' ed s 4 - L BW.  . Way co” poo of a y————_— - 1 l M1. woe - 0 F | ("4 l 4 | 4 ' z
afrors inhotpy +4, Ys jo=
ACIDTIP "es  _- —_— IE .
: D 7 t- tha rd EIS mains _ __— Ara 5 _— - "74 GE ——— *—— » wm 2, fr a4 or I-45 ins 4 $79 —<5ne 14425 2 9 lng LT = WMr=s Sh thro rar ; ES eoreng oo ole et ge I SE a _— *G MES
note EUR ER IT - - w5 = ». 4. = G BEL NE*1 IF - keen BET Sj > - pK —_—_ : : 4 =_ 7 a. 1 ; Fs
And fo rewarded: Pray depreſs your Spirit ;
age thoughts of Cruelty and Blood, rt the fireets of Rowe in ſtreams did flow From Hearts of Senators under the Reigns Of our ſeverer Warlike Emperors! WH under this ſcarcely one Criminal | Mects the hard Sentence of the dooming Law, And the whole World diſlolv'd into a Peace, Owes its Security to this Mans Pleaſures ; | But Acizg-——be ſincere, do not defend. þ Actions and Principles your Soul abhors. | You know this Virtue 1s his greateſt Vice : Impunity is the higheſt Tyranny: And what the fawning Court muſcals his Pleaſures, Exceeds the Mederation of a Man : - Nay to fay juſtly, Friend, they are loath'd Vices,
ij Tr TRAGEDY of-
And fuch as ſhake our Worths with Foreign Nations.
' Zcius. You ſearch the'Sore too deep ; andict me tell you In ary Other man, this had been Treaſon;
For tho' 1 conſtantly believe you honeſt
| (You were no Friend for me elſe) ; and what riow
— - —
You freely ſpeak, But good you owe to the Empire, Yet take heed, Worthy Maximus, all Fars Hear not with that diſtinftion mine do, few you'l find Admoniſhers, but Urgers of your Ations, © | And to the Heavieſt (Friend) and pray conſider. We are but Shadows, , Motions others give us, . And tho' our Pities may become the Times, Our Powers cannot," nor may we juſtifie Our private Jealouſics, by open Force, Wite or whar Elie to me it matters —_—— kc. E am your Friend, but. durſt my-own Soul mae Be... And by that Soul I ſpeak my juſt ans. - To turn my hand from Fruth,. which is Obedience . And give the Hclm my Virtue helds, to Anger, Tho' I had both the Bleſlings of the Braz; . - And both their inſligations, tho' my Cauſe Carry'd a Face of Juſtice Leyond theirs, | __ am - ans to my Fortunes,
a caring Soul that firſt tausht Nifake.?; Should fect thee firſt Fant © TA Sens
— —
Gr RR
—_ —_—
VALENTINIAN.. S
Max. Miſtake me not my deareſt A#cius, - TT Do not believe that through mean Jealouſfic: How far th! Emperor” S Paſſion may prevail.
On my Lacina's thoughts to our Diſhonour,: That I abhor the Perſon. of my Prince, Alas ! That Honour were a trivial Loſs - Which ſhe and I want merit:to preſerve ; . Virtue and Maximus are.placd too near Lacina's Heart, to leave hintfuch a fear, No private loſs or wrong, inflames my Spirits, The Roman Glory , Afcius, lan I am concern'd for Rome, and for the World, And when th'Emperor pleaſes to afford . Time from his Pleaſures,:to takecare of thoſe, -. T am his Slave, and have a Sword and Life - Still ready for his Service. |
ZEcins. Now you are brave, . And like a Romay juſtly are concern'd : But fay he be to blame. Are therefore we Fit Fires topurge him? No, My Deareſt Friend, , The Elephant 1s never won: with-Anger, - Nor muſt that man who would.recaima Lion Take him by the Teeth. ; Our honeſt Actions, and the Truth that breaks Like Morning from our Service chaſt and bluſhing, - Ts that that pulls a Prince back, then he. ſees. And not till then truly repents his Errors. | .
Max. My Heart agrees with yours : Fltake your Council,*, The Emperor appears; let us withdraw + | And as We both do love him, may he flouriſh, . © Bxteuntee.
Enter Va lentil and Lucins:
Pal. Which way, Lacina, hope you to eſcape, | The Cenſures both of Tyrannous and Proud, While your Admirers languith by your Eyes- .
And at your feet an Emperor deſpairs/ Gods ! Why was I mark'd out of all your Brood: To ſuffer tamely under mortal hate > :
Is it not I that do prote& your Shrines 2 £
: YL. {. - %
The TRAGEDY f q:
or of Your Sacrifice and Pray'rs 2 Pad b "whoſe great Commands the knowing World Submits to own your Beings and your Power. Ang muſt I feel the Torments of Neglect 2 Betray'd by Love to bethe Slave of Scorn 2 But 'tis not you, Poor harmleſs Denies,
"That can make Yalentinian ſigh and mourn /
Alas! All Power is in Lacinas Eyes / How ſoon could I ſhake off this heavy Earth Which makes me little lower than your ſelves, And ſit in Heaven an Equal with the firſt ; But Love bids me purſue a Nobler Aim. Continue Mortal, and Lacina's Slave, From whoſe fair Eyes, would pity take my part, And bend her Will to fave a bleeding Heart, [ in Her Arms ſuch Blefſings ſhou'd obtain, For which th'unenvy'd Gods might with in vain. Laciz. Ah! Ceaſe to tempt thoſe Gods and Virtue too / Great Emperor of the World an1 Lord of me / Heaven has my Life ſubmitted to your Will / My Honour's Heav'ns, which will preſerve its own. How vile a thing am I when that is gone / When of my Honour you have riff'd me, - What other Merit have I to be yours - With my fair Fame let me your Subj live, And fave that Humbleneſs you fmile upon, Thoſe Gracious Looks, whoſe brightneſs ſhou'd rejoy <<, 9s yu poor qr tremble when ſhe thinks t they appear like Lightning's fatal Flaſh | Which by d-krattive Tiemder © perfud, Blaſting thoſe Fields on which it ſhin'd before / And ſhou'd the Gods abandon worthleſs Me A Sacrifice to ſhame and to diſhonour ; A Plague to Rome, and Blotto C efar's Fame / For what Crime yet unknown ſhall Maximus = = _ ot be made infamous 2 C alt ulr rant, and in deſt 90 true, ſo brave, ſo a age 7 __
| and fo } Who ner knew fauk : Why thou'd he fall to Shame 2
=
VALENTINIAN. 7
Pal. Sweet Innocence ! Alas! Your Maximas (Whom 1 like you eſteem? ) is in no Danger If Duty and Allegiance be no ſhame / Have I not Prztors through the ſpacious Earth Who in my Name do mighty Nations ſway - Enjoying rich Domimions in my Right , Their Temporary Governments [| change, Divide or take away, as I ſee good ; And this they think no Injury nor Shame ; Can you believe your Husband's Right to you Other than what from me he does derive ? Who juſtly may recall my own at pleaſure ; Am I not Emperor > This World my own > | Given me without a Partner by the Gods 2 | And ſhall thoſe Gods who gave me all, allow That one leſs than my felf thould have a Claim To you the Pride and Glory of the whole 2 You, without whom the reſt is worthlefs droſs ; Life a baſe Slavery, Empire but a Mock : And Love, the Soul of all, a bitter Curſe / No, only Bleſſing, Maximus and 1 Muſt change our Provinces, the World ſhall bow Beneath my Scepter, graſp in his ſtrong hand Whoſe Valour may reduce rebellious Slaves, And wiſe Integrity ſecure the reſt : In all thoſe Rights the Gods to me have given ; While I from tedious Tolls of Empire free, The ſervile Pride of Government deſpiſe / Find Peace and Joy, and Love and Heav'n in Thee, And ſeek for all my Glory in thoſe Eyes. | Lucina. Had Heav'n deſign'd for me fo great a Fate, | AS Cafar's Love I ſhou'd have been preſerv'd, By careful Providence for Him alone, Not ofter'd up at firſt to Maximus; J For Princes ſhould not mingle with their Slaves, | Nor ſeek to quench their Thurſt in troubled ſtreams. Nor am fram'd withthoughtsfit for a Throne. To be commanded ſtill has been my Joy ; And tooobey the height of my Ambition. When young in Anxious Cares I ſpent the Day,
Irembling.
in PEI rn — — — A = DC EE mm —
—— ® _ >, .
FRE 7 | - & ens
Trembling for fear leaſt cach unguided ſtep Should ticad the-paths of Error'and: of Blame : Till Heav'n in gentle pity-jent my Lord,
In whoſe Commands my Wiſhes meet their end, Pleasd and tecure while following his Will ; Whether to liveor die I cannot err.
You like the Sun, Great Sir, are plac'd abore,
I, alow Mirtle, in the humble Vale,
May flouriſh by your diſtant infence,
But ſhould you bend your Glories nearer mc, Such fatal Favour withers me to duſt Or in fooliſh gratitude deſtre To kiſs your ſeet, by whom we live and grow, To ſuch a height I ſhould in vain aſpire,
' VYho am already rooted here below Fixt in my Maximus's Breaſt I lie / Torn from that Bed, like 'gather'd Flow'rs, I die. Pal. Ceaſe to oppreſs me with a thoufand Charms /
There needs no ſuccour to prevailing Arms /
Your Beauty had ſubdud my Heart before,
Such Virtue could alone enflave me more:
If you love Maximas to this degree /
How would you be in Love, Did youlove Me 2
In Her, who to a Husband is ſo kind,
VVhat Raptures might a Lover hope to find > ; I burn, Lacina, like a Field of Corn | = By flowing ſtreams of kindled Flames ore-born |  Vhen North-winds drive the Torrent with a ſtorm, Theſe Fires intymy Boſom you have thrown, 7 - muſt » pity quench *em in your own : ;
eav-n, when it gave your Eyes th' ?
VVhich was par'E. a ISS Pk Into Loves Feaver, kindly did impart That Sea of Milk to bathe his burning Heart.
Throv' all thoſe Joys. | LLays hold on Fer.
Lucina. Hold, Sir, for Mercy's fake — Love will abhor whatever Force cantake. I may perhaps perſuade my ſelf in time That this iSDuty which=now ſeems a Crime;
Y
VALENTINIA
11 to the Gods and begg they will infpire
My Breaſt or Yours with what it ſhou'd defire. Val. Fly to their Altars ſtrait, and let 'em know
Now 1s their time to make me Friend or Foe, |
If to my Wiſhes they your Heart incline, : OY
Or tlYare no longer Favourites of mine. LExit Lucina.
Ho Chylax, Procalus 2 X
. - % Lo
Enter Chylax, Proculus, Balbus and Lycun.
As ever you do hope to be by me
Protected in your boundleſs Infamy,
For Diſlelutenefs cheriſh'd, lov'd and praisd
On Pyramids of your own Vices raisd ,
Above the reach of Law, Reproof or Shame,
Aſſiſt me now to quench my raging Flame.
Tis not as keretotorea Lambent Fire,
Raisd by fome common Beauty in my Breaſt, .
Vapours from Idlenelſs or looſe Defire, |
By each new Motion eaſily ſuppreſt,
But a fixt Heat that robs me of all reſt.
Before my Dazled Eyes cou'd you now place
A thouſand willing Beauties to allure -
And give me Luſt for every looſe Embrace,
Lacina's Love my Virtue would fecure,
From the contagious Charm in vainIfly, 3
"Thas ſeiz'd upon my Heart, and may defie - c
That great Prefervative Variety /- -
Go, call” your Wives to Councel, and 7 20 jp
To tempt, diflemble, promite, fawn and ſwear,
To make Faith look like Folly uſe your skill
Virtue an ill-bred Crofleneſs in the Will.
Fame, the looſe breathings of a Clamorous Crowd /7
Ever in Lies moſt confident and loud /
Honour a Notion ? Piety a Cheat /
And if you prove ſucceſsful Bawds, be _ ; Chy. All hind'rance to your hopes wel foon remove,
And clear the Way. to-your triumphant Love. ©  _. Bal. Lucina for your Wiſhes well prepare, hong
And ſhew we know to merit what we are C S—_ ;
Ct C al.
. - md . n . Pre 4 o ' : 197 4422 2 ne en NES woot hee Saws aac 4pm m——_—_ 1 haves 4 Mmg>_—_—_ T * oE VESTS 4:7 F143
4 —_ = re th evo tow ranypes © rhgcds ye
EM C—_—
ip Ea? EE Gyre; — lr Tex pray
-—_— _—
SE = = - 8
at-bats adn pena "EIT 0:09 1 FER
 &; EEC, _— 22538 = © "ESL, "IT WEE EDS I > 7 I TY ” a: ey ALI MIS I ans TR Le =. ET GERaS : > "WP. — LOGS: -_ S 2-5 _ = - 5 anne r: ; —_— wp. . UE I A
' r = a tgr-<5 tc} = 0203+ $i rg Fon Eg rh PEE CIIE= 22: rr ns | Gs 2 Who} $a&v* 45=- " $ - & 4a 2 It 444 44+ bmmurens <td one 1 gt 2c ba 4 WELL ” - - 51 ..Y z 32 age ibs 2» 2 —_ den - - ome —_—_ onntr $22 40 gr eine —— _ ; a 4" W526 6 A ,
3 + e=——_—_ 1 C.
—— Hz "< :3EZs
Ia 49> £þ | MOSES 2m Hmm on 2 tnet = 17T ESTTEFESE = EHE > re
wo m6) IT INN — £2 0%; EA TTOIEES m:
nance. Hl -eoth T5.vk 6 © +6. -4FUIN'S? FSG <=: "42 Ito Ear ==43-;: 5 - tt} 22802--2 i Kt
Fe _ SWISS
And plant our Trophies on our Conqurors Charms.
SER 2d 1 tiger re TIE! NS Fen h w—ELES > py = Pe p -
© PEoerertr bo renner + - wits wy -
o Thr TRAGEDY ff \
al. Once more the pow'r of Vows and TearsTl prove, Theſe may perhaps her gentle Nature move,
To Pity firſt, by conlequenceto Love.
Poor are the Brutal Conqueſts we obtain
Ore Barb'rous Nations by the force of Arms, |
But when with humble Love a Heart we gain,
Enter Fc1us.
Such Triumphs ev'n to us may honour bring | No Glory's vain, which does trom Pleafure ſpring : How now Zcixs ! Are the Souldiers quiet: Zcins. Better I hope, Sir, than they were. Pal. Tixare pleasd | hear Hh To cenſure me extreamly for my Pleaſures ; Shortly they'l fight againſt me. Zcins. Gods defend, Sir. And for their Cenfures they are Such ſhrewi Judges 7 A Donative of ten Sexterces Fl undertake ſhall make *emring your Praiſes More than they ſung your Pleaſures. Val. 1 believe thee / Art thou in Love A#cixs yet 2 cis. Oh no, Sir, Tam too coarſe for Ladies, my Embraces, That only am acquainted with Allarms, | Would break their tender Bodies. | Val. Never fear it. . Nob They are ſtronger than you think ——— The Empreſs ſwears thou art a Luſty Souldier, A good one : __ thee. | cias. All that Goodneſs is but your C - Ot Yal. But tell me truly, | 7 | JIE, Sts. | For thou dart tell me ; Fcius. Any thing concerns you = fit To me to Bk or uo to pardon. fb 1 Mine em oe god Ze, dy ue Worth
The very Forms and Tongues they talk withal,
Mcius.
Zcins. T1 tell you, Sir ; but with this Caution You be not ſtirr'd : For ſhould the Gods live with us Even thoſe we certainly believe are righteous,
Give 'em but Drink, They'd cenfure them too. Val. Forward !
Zcius. Then to begin, They fay you ſkep too much, By which they judge you, Sir, too ſenſual : Apt to decline your ſtrength to eaſe and pleaſure : And when you do not ſkep, you drink too much ; From which they fear Suſpitions firſt, then Ruine, : And when youneither drink nor ſleep you gueſs, Sir, Which they affirm firſt breaks your Underſtanding, Then dulls the edge of Honour, makes them feem That are the Ribs and Rampires of the Empire, Fencers and beaten Fools, and fo regarded : But I believe 'em not: for were theſe Truths, Your Virtue can correCt them.
Pal. They ſpeak plainly.
cins. They fay moreover, Sir, ſince you will have it ; For they will take their freedoms tho' the Sword Were at their throats : That of late times like Nero, And with the ſame forgetfulneſs of Glory You have got avein of Fidling: So they term it.
Pat. Some drunken Dreamers, Afcins.
Acius. SoT hope, Sir. They ſay beſides, you nouriſh ſtrange Devourers ; Fed with the Fat of the Empire, they call Bawds, Lazy and Juſtful Creatures that abuſe you. .
Val. What Sin's next > for I perceive they haveno mind To ſpare me /
Zcius. Nor hurt you, on my Soul, Sir : but ſuch people (Nor can the pow'r of man reſtrain it) When they are full of Meat, and Eaſe, muſt prate.
Pal. Forward. |
ZEcinus. | have ſpoken too much, Sir.
Pal. Fi have all
ins. It is not fit
Can juſtly ariſe to you from their Behaviour. Unleſs you were guilty of theſe _ 2 = s
oo 4 4h 2 nee et txhggep— ene Imoronert AP Si 24} je 2-06 2; >a pub 745554 2 £ Tz” : - _— Ge LES SITETT - 72s mt = - <4
+ 4 «| o| 4s (3-83 is j f #: 210 7
4
VE "TIER
Yal. Ir may be, Tamſo. Th erefore forward. Fcins. 1 have ever learn'd to obey.
1al. No more Apologies. _ Acins. They bee reſides, Sr, | To ice the Narions whom our ancient Virtue | With many 2 weary March and Hunger conquer d Wirh loſs of many a daring Life ſbdu'd ill rom their fair Okedience, and ev'n murmur To ſee the Warlike Eagles mew their Honours, In obſcure Towns , that usd to prey on Princes, They cry for Enemies, and tell the Captain The Frutts of Zaly are Luſcious : Give us Zgypr, Or fandy Africk to diſplay our Valours, There, where our Swords may get us Meat and Dangers ?
Digeſt our well-got Food, for here our Weapons
And Bodies that were made for ſhining Braſs, _ _ 'Areboth unedg'd and old with Eafe and Women 7 "I
And then they cry again Fe Where are the Germans Lind with hot Spazx or Gallia 2 Bring 'emnear : And let the Son of War, ſteel'd Mithridates Pour on us his wing d Parthians like a ftorm : _ Hiding the face of Heay'n with ſhow'rs of Arrows, = =Y Yet we dare fight like Wmars ; then as Souldiers Tyrd with a weary March, they tell their Wounds Ev'n weeping ripe, they were no more nor deeper, And glory in theſe Scarsthat make 'em lovely. '
. And ſitting wherea Camp was, like fad Pilgrims ©
They reckon up the Times and loading Labours'
Of Julius or Germanicus, and wonder : TEN __ That Rome, whoſe Turrets once were topt with Honour © © Cannow forget the Cuſtom of her Conqueſts; © | | And then they blame you, Sir—4nd fay, Who leads us /
Shall we ſtand here like Statues ! Were our Fathers
The Sons of lazy Moors, our Princes Perfians !
Nothing bur Silk and Softneſs > Curſes on 'em Wy
That firit tavght Nero Wantonneſs and —__ 5-5. Titerins Doubts, Caligula all Vices; oY
For from the ſpring ot theſe ſucceed; Thus they all. GL © lucceeding Princes—
Vat.
—— —— —— — —  —  —— — —— ——_C_— — — r —— —— — ——— ——————— __————— _—__
VALENTINIAN. 13 Pal. Well ! ED OTE CIR WS Why do you hear thete things ++ 2 ett EET Zcins. Why do you do'em > Wo Co E take the Gods to witneſs with more forrow ito And more vexation hear I thefe Reproaches = Irs Than were my Life dropt from me-through an Hour-Glafs. * *: Pal. "Tis like then you believe 'em or at leaſt EEE Are glad they ſhould be fo : Take heed —you were better Build your own Tomb, and run into it living | Than dare a Princes Anger. ZEcins. 1 am old, Sir : ESE: : | = And ten years more addition is but nothing : i Now if my Life be pleaſing to you, take it. i Upon my knees, if ever any Service NID | | (As let me brag, ſome have been worthy notice !) | IF ever any Worth or Truſt you gave me Deſerv'd a Favour, Sir ; If all my Actions The hazards of my Youth, Colds, Burnings, Wants Ss For You and for the Empire be not Vices : - | By the ſtile Jou have ſtampt, upon me, Souldier / _ Let me not fall inro the Hands of Wretches. Yal. 1 underſtand you not. Acins. Let not this Body © 7 That has look'd bravely in his Blood for Ceſar | Age _—_— of Wounds, and for your ri (FO ME. ; F Aſter the ſcape of Swords, Spears, Slings and Arrows, _ = 'Gainſt whkch are ws body was iny Armgt 8. k Le ng Throu' Seas, and thirſty Defarts, now be purchiace For Slaves and baſe mformers:' F/T And Death, look throu' your.Eyes—I am markt for *. Slaughter, and know thetelſing of this Tryth has made Me,
A man clean loſt to this World enibr; <it on Only my laſt Petition, Sacred Ceſar! OO Is, Imay die a Ronan —— , _ | F _= __ =y read Mt”: FOR And wortay of my Love : Reclaim the Souldiers: _- : Fl ſtudy to To ſo Ferns ſelf oy Yes, $ Go—keep your Can and proſper, Acins. Lite to Cafar ——
CEx | Val. yat.
Cr TOO GT”
Jo 14 . Te TRAGEDY ff 7a. The Honeſty of this Acius, ES Who is indeed the Bulwark of my Empire _ ne Is to be cheriſht for the —_ brings, _ das a Merit inthe Owner: W: | pep mack Slaves bound up by. Gratitude, And Duty-hasno Claum beyond Acknowledgment Which Il pay Acius, whom I-{ull have found 4 firkful, humble, vigilant and brave - - ; Talents as I could wiſh 'em for.my Slave: I Bur ob this Woman ! AT | - Is it a Sin tolove this lovely Woman ? DM No: She is ſuch a Pleature, being:good ; Thatthough I were a God, ſhee'd tire my Blood. | The End of the Firſt AB. ACT-IL- ;SCEN.I_ | Enter Balbus, Proculus, Chylax, Lycinius. ; Bal. Never faw the like ſhe's nomore ſtirr'd, z No more anotfier Woman, no more alter'd 3 With any Hopes or Promiſes laid to her, 7
Let them be ne'r ſo weighty, ne'r fo winning, : Than Tam with the motion of my own Legs. ouare a ſtranger yet in theſe Deſigns, | MT At leaſt in Rome, tell ine, and tell'me truth © | __— cer know in all your coarſe of Pratice | Inallthe ways of Women you have run through For I preſume you have been brought up, Chylax, As we, to fetch and carry. 6, cy han 1 have ſo. Ee | rc. Did you, 1 fay again in alf this Progrefs © Ever diſcover ſuch a Hh. 4 of Beauty 5 :
Y & 7 To =  * OE SIE
OO TT re LIICO ILY x
4 IR F ERIN DOES 5:
VALENTINLAN, *
Ever fo rare a Creature, and no doubt
One that maſt know her worth too and affet it,"
L and be flatter; elſe*tis none: and honeſt ©
Honeſt againſt the Tide of all Temptations ?
Honeſt to on* Man, and to her Husband only,
And yet not E.gareen, not of Age to know
Why ſhe is honeſt > - Chyl. 1 confeſs it freely
F never faw her Fellow, nor ever ſhall :
Fo: all our Grecian Dames as I have tryd p
And fure T have try'd a handred—if I fay Two
I jpcak within my Compaſs : All theſe Beauties -
And all the Conſtancy of all theſe Faces 4
Maids, Widdows, Wives, of what Degree or Calling
So they be Greeks and at : for there's my Cunning
I would vndertake, and not fweat fort : Proculus,
Were they to try again, fay twice as many
Under a Thoufand pound to'lay them flat : |
But this Wench ſtaggers me. - Lycin. Do you fee theſe Jewels?
You would think theſe pretty Baitsnow; T1 affure _ .
Here's half the Wealth of Abe. | | ' Bal. Theſe are nothing ©: I |
To the full Honours I pro rided to ties”
F bid her think and be, Top ot
Whatever her Ambition, whar the Council
Of others would add to, her, What her Dreams.
Could more enlarge, What any Pt
Of any Woman rifing 1 up to Glory ; "Ta
And ſtanding certain there, and in the hi
Could giveher more, Nay to be Empreſs— Proc. And cold at all theſe. Offers > AF Bal. Cold as Cry al, {aa
Never to be thaw" i "P Chy. I try'd her further : | |
And fo far that I think ſhe is no Woman.
At leaſt as Women go now. . | Zycius Why what did you #7 "
eo
Cby:.
| EESES oo ton _rinn Ae Tame D END INT -  Mr , kkes =: iapt 2 == ©—""ERMEzk. EE. => — ol 6a tr 4% Smnznr = = =: : * 3444 F = Eres
CLE SIIEIDS. Hops. --: —_— _
16 © Te TRAGEDY ff red that; that had ſhe been but Miſtreſs op as Doves have, I had reach'd Her A fafe Revenge of all that ever hate her, The crying down for ever of all Beauties That may be thought come Near her. = . That was pretty. = | hs [ never noe that way fail ; yet I tell you, T offer d her a Gift keyond all yours |_ That, that had made a Saint ſtart well conlider'd . The Law to be her Creature; ſhe to make. it,
' Her Mouth to give ir,; Every thing alive - ' From her Aſpet to draw their Good or Evil
Fixt in'em ſpight of Fortune, a new Nature |
She ſhould be call'd, and Mother of all Ages ;
Time ſhould be hers,- what ſhe did, flatt'ring Virtues Should bleſs to all Poſterities, Her Ar _ | Should give us Life, Her Earth and Water feed us, And laſt to none but to the Emp'ror. _ py
| (And'then but when ſhe pleas'd to liave it o:) _ -. She ſhould be held a_ Mortal... ., _ © ;
. Lxcis. And ihe heard you 7 * ©
Chy. Yes, as a fick man hears 2 Noiſe, or he N þ : ; -
That ſtands condemn'd, his Judgment. > 7 S Well, if there can be Virtue, it that Name”
Be any thing bur Name, and empty Title,
IF it be fo as Fools are usd to feign it,
© A Power that can preſerve.us after Death,
And make the Names of Men out-reckon Ages, This Woman has a God of Virtue in her. wy -Bal. I would the Emperor were that God.
All the Contempt of Glory, and vain ſeeming
Of all the Stoicks, All the Truth of Chriſtians, : | And all their Conſtancy ; Modeſty was'made ' | *'\ When ſhe was firſt intended ; When ſhe bluthes It is the holieſt thing to look upon ; © © © The pureſt Temple of her Sex, that ever”. © # Made Nature a bleſt Founder, ped {on bagkbl
If ſhe were any way inclining
: * : þ x7 « . * Ss -» ”. q "09 2  £6$ - eb —y: 62-4 uw) -:.4-; ; "Pi by n — « $:6 , » {#36
; Af + + d
nn + ww
S. ,; ' ape un cr :,
aaron CEEES >, wb 44
LEY | «16s
' * . ah. hh, T4 T4 =z-z, p26 _— L.-+ ® +» i * * - i». 2s {456 % $4 1 - o
a. a} 348
This two and thirty Year.
Chyl. I find by this fair Lady
* The Calling of a Bawd tobe a ſtrange
A wiſe and ſubtle Calling : And for none |
But ftaid,-diſcreet. and underſtanding People :
And as the Tutorto great Alexander
VVould fay, A young man-ſhould not dare to real : His Moral Books till after five and twenty,
So muſt that He ar She that will be Bawdy, (1 mean diſcreetly Bawdy, and be truſted) If they will rife and gain Experieace;,  - _ VVell fteept in Years and Diſcipline , begin it——
I take it*tis no Boys Play.
Bal. VVhar's to be thought of 2... © _ - - _ TS ; Proc. The Emperor muft know.x. - I
Lycin. If the VVomen ſhould chance to fail t00— Chy. As?tis ten to one.
LT ET TS.
Proc. VVhy whatremains-but new Nets for the purpoſe——
"Ti Emperor —— ; YI IMS 4CIN Si: pe Of Enter Valentinian. PIELIS Emp. VVhat! have you brought Her a. Fioitzs Cby. Brought her, Sir! Alas, ot bot 3,0 DIED 0D VVhat would you do with fuch a Cake of Ice © VVhomall the Love rt? Empire cannot thaw. 7 14k : ' D
———  DD— CT x - | Ep 8 The TRAGEDY o | croſs thing, inſenſible of Glory, Nor all Ss. dead to Deſire, | A tedious ſtickler for her Husband's Rights, VVho like a Beggars Curr hath br ought her up To fawn'on him, and Lark at all betides. £ Emp. Lewd and ill-manner'd Fool, wer't not :or fear Todo thee good by mending of thy Manners - | Fd have thee whipt! Is this tlraccount you bring To eaſe the Torments of my reſtleſs mind. Balb. T Cefar\Invainyour Vaſſals haveendeavourd. Kneeling. *% Promiſes, Perſwaſions, Reaſons, VVealth,. All that can-make the firmeſt Virtue bend To alter-Her. Our Arguments like Darts- Shot in the Boſom of the boundleſs Air Are loſt and do not leave the leaſt Imprefſion:: - Forgive us, if we faikd to overcome Vextue that could reſiſt the Emperor. Emp. You impotent Provokers of my Luft, VVho can incite and have no power to help, How dare.you-be aliveand I unfatisfied, | VVho to your Beings have no other Title | : ' Nor leaſt Hopes to preſerve em, but my Smiles; . f VVho play like poyſonous Infefts all theDay © In-thewarmShine of Me your Vital Sun ;- And when Night comes muſt peri | E; VVretches! whoſe-vicious Lives wheni withdraw: + The Abſolute Prote&ion-of my Favour: : V-Vill drag you. into all the Miſeries That your own Terrors; Univerſal Hate, | And Law, with Jayls and VVhivs can bring upon y REY As you have faiPd to fatisfiemy VViſhes, = Perdition-is the leaſt-you can expect © j _ V ho durſt to apy can and not perform | es: was it fit I ſho di ; 5 Yet live—— "bediappointed > = Continue infamous a little longer - You-havedeſerv'd to.end. By fo. this 6nce Ftnot-rread out your naſty ſaufls of Life - But had your poyſonous Elatteries prevail
VALENTINIAN mw
Upon her Chaſtity I Oadmire,
A Virtue that adds Fury 'to my Flames ! Dogs had devour'd Cre this your Carcaſs ;
1s that an Object fit for my Deſues -
VVhich lies within the reach of your perſuaſions'! Had you by your infettious Induſtry
Shew'd my Lacina frail to that degree, ©
You had been damn'd for undeceiving me, But to poſleſs her chaſte and uncorrupted, There hes the Joy and Glory of my Love ! A Paſſion too refin'd for your dull Souls , And ſuch a Bleſſing as I ſcorn to owe
The gaining of to any but my ſelf;
Haſte ſtrait to Maximes, and let him know He muſt come inſtantly and ſpeak with me;
The reſt of you wait here—Yle play to night:
You,
For Lyczas hither by the Garden Gate, That ſweet-fac'd Eunuch that ſung
In Maximus's Grove the other day,
And in my Cloſet keep him till I come. T Exit Valent. Chyl. 1 fhall, Sir. _ |
'Tis a ſoft Rogue, this Lyczas ,
And rightly underſtood,
Hee's worth a thouſand Womens Niceneſles !
TheLove of VVomen moves even with their Luft,
VVho therefore ſtill are fond, but ſeldom juſt :
Their Love is Uſury, while they
To gain the Pleaſure double which they lend. But a dear Boy's difintereſted Flame Gives Pleaſure, and for meer Love gathers pain; ,, In him alone Fondneſs ſincere does prove, _ And the kind tender Naked Boy is Love. LExH.
D 2 SCENE
WE
's|
ifs ++ 4479 ©£144 10 ..41 x b |
>
=
$17-55"&
» TeTRAGEDY. of | SCENE 2 AGARDEN. Futer Lucina, -Ardclia aud Phorta. 7
Ard. You tilt inſiſt upon that Idol Hondur, Can ir renew your Youth 2 Can it add VVealt! > Or take off wrinkles? Can it draw mens Eyes To gaze upon you in your. Age? Can Honour . That truly is a Saint to none but Souldiers, _ . And hokt into, bears no Reward but Danger, - Leave you the moſt reſpected VYVoman lvirg? - Or can the common Kiffes of -a Hustand - {VVYhich to-a Sprightly Lady s a Labour.) -: - En Make you-almoſt immortal >- You-dre- cozenitl; :. £44: -.c "ol The Honour of a VVoman ts her Praifes, . - * | ir £1: The way to get theſe, to be ſeen-and fought to,-.. . -\ 364
- And not to. bury ſuck a happy Sweetneſs . Under a ſmoaking Robf. =
\ 2 . AY. .o> nd þ p - e.'* - 4
Lecina. Vihear no more. © ' - © oct gn tif Phorb. That VVhite and Red, and all that blooming Beauty; Kept from the Eyes that make it fo is -nothing : T5 Then you are truly*fair when: men proclaim it:: - The Phenix that was-never ſeen is donbted, > 1 iS But whenthe Virtue's known, the Honour's doubled ; - . + {24 l $
Virtue is either lame-or. norat- all; + - KA | And Love Sacriledge and'not” a Saint, E Ee c'Þ - VVlien it barrs up the way to mens Petitions: - $h _ Ard. Nay you ſhall love your Husband too: VVe '" 3% F Come not to make? Mohfter of your” ft ©, Zacin. Are you VVomen? "1d
Ard." You'lfind usſo; and women you ſhalltharik too __
Tt you have but Grace to make your Uſe. 7 Luci: Fie on you... E
- bor. Als, poor baſhfal Lidy + By my : _ Fd Jou no other Virtue, but your Bluſhes ; And] a Mit, A ſhould ryn mad foy taole ! f 3 Ard
Co nies OI erate rg nes —————_ --.»
[-4-$
Fo $ + s Py x NEW. [+ -- OS 3 + WS 4 rf 2b Any
o 5 1, 4% Corn. ld KT"
—— —
V ALEN'TINI ANY 1
Ard. Come, Goddeſs, come! move toe near the It muſt not be, 2 better Orb Rs -you;*"' - Ear, Lacin. Pray leave me. | EE Phorb. That were a Sir}? fweet Madaih, and E'way:: To make us guilty of your Melanchdly ;' - % 4--E You muſt not be alone ; In Converſation ” THEY od Seek Doubtsare reſolv'd, and. what ſticketiear the Conſicne Made eaſie and allowabk:” Lucin. Ye are Devils. + - Ard. That you may one. - ly bleſs IT jt - Datlatſali- Lucin. T charge you in theNaine of Ch: lthity ... OR INY Tempt me no more: how ugly you ſeem to me! i VT There*s no wonder Men defame ourSex, Ae,
And lay the Vices of all Ages on us, 8 "2 * Es When ſuch as you ſhall bear the Name of Womei! j* 37 OF-2004 Þ If you had Eyes toſee-your ſelves, or ſets; - © = EF eg en Above the baſe Rewards yee earn with ſharne! Fe CAE. Ifever in your Lives yee heard of Goodneſs ' 8 CE D.
Tho' many Regions off, —as men hear Thunder ; | ©. If ever you had Fathers, and they Souls, *'* © bo 09, TY HI: Or ever Mothers,” and not ſuch as. you are! . 7 0 if ever any thing were conſtant 1 in you 953 EDT BD G72
Befides yourSins ! | HE £2. 250 08 So
If 'any of your Anceſtors LEN Dy'd worth a Noble Deed—thar. Hou be hit MOTED 82; _ ; Soul-frighted with: this black: Infe&tion, * ELESEEO
Ly A +4 A & ” . es ox £'F; «df do. 6
You would run from one anothers Repentance,” And from your-Guilty Eyes OP. out thoeSing © PIEIE That made ye blind'and Beaſts: : | fo OE Phorb.: You ſpeak well, Mlagant! ou A fign of fruztiul Education - HEES EE STI If your religious Zeal had Wil6m Gs i. AODINSLTE Ard. This Lady. was- ordain'd to, He he Ear, ET og And we may all give thanks for Her. - | PER Phorb. | believe you. - We os | _ = "Coke Ard. It any thing redeem the cor: ©
P!
4 * Pg 4d % » LEE ? > ' $#.%. ' i + JF * k Ea * = LE 44 © A a & 6 6 Si # * q
Lab Ei 2et +4 EC ECLNEY mmm
From his wild flying Courſes this is the! © © She can inſtruct hini—if your mark—ſhe's wiſe to0.. . Phor. Exceeding wiſe, which is a wonder in her ;
hd n « -
And- +
"of
2a Ty TRAGEDY &...
And fo religious that I well believe, Tho' ſhe AT fin ſhe cannot.
. Ard. And beſides She hes the Empire's Cauſe 1n hand, not Love's,
There lies the main conſideration: For which ſhe is chiefly born. Phorb. She finds that Point Es Strongerthan we can tell her, and beheve it | look by her means tor a Reformation, And ſuch a one, 'and ſuch a rare way. carry d. Ard. 1 never thought the Emperor had wiſdon, Pity, or fair AﬀeCtion to his Country, . | Till he profeſt this Love. Gods give 'em Cluldrer Such as ker Virtues merit and his Zeal; [ look to ſee a Numa from thys Lady, Or greater than Offavzas. Phor. Do you mark too Whichis a noble Virtue—how ſhe bluſhes, : And what flowing Modeſty runs through her E: - When we but name the Emperor. . _—- = '- Ard. Mark it ! pt, . Yes, and admire it too : for ſhe confiders eg 5 th 1 Tho' ſhe be fair as Heav'n, and Virtuous [4k 0k As holy Truth ; Yet to the Emperor TREES: She 1s a kind of Nothing— but her Service ;
: Which ſhe is bound to offer, and ſhel do it ; \nd whenher Countries Cauſe commands AﬀeGtion, ihe knows Otedience is the Key of Virtues ; - hen fly the Bluſhes out like Cupid's Arrows, 4nd though the Tie of Marriage to her Lord, Would fain cry, ſtay Lacina——yet the Cauſe And general Wiſdom of the Prince's Love | Makes her find ſurer Ends and happier, 1 And if the firſt were chaſte theſe are twice doubled. | Phor. Her Tartnefs to us too. EL 4:1 77 -_ THONG wiſe one. | i, "VE: : i: ike it, it ſhews a riſi Wiſd | of That chides all common Fodk who | +1
1 ,__ I i =_ FEA % NEAR! . b \ «4 aro; MP IT SFO ty RS AR
— - ———<-—=— —— Fr. ure IT » T_T — x ++ Mt a nds - —_—— os. ti. <7 ben : ga EIS h $5 DS. ES Een 2nd EE : ous = = VIE ; fas ag a TY : 1 7] wits
2 e) &S%:
_ p05" ib = £493.25
jt - ; ; Vhat Princes would have private. Pet Ard. 4 bf
i | Proper th Tr nodcbet Ry; ik OE £ 34-602 PUTS IRS SUI G
* k 4 roads;
Ard. What a Lady ſhall we be bleſt to ſerve > Lacin. Go—get you, from me, - ht. Yee are your Purſes Agents notthe Princes Is this the virtuous Love Fyou train'd meout to 7 AmT a Woman fit to Imp your Vices? But that I had a Motherand a Woman Whoſe ever living Fame turns all it touches Intothe Good, it ſelf was, F ſhoald now Even doubt my ſelf; T have been ſearcht ſo near” The very Soul of Honour. Why ſhou'd you Two That happily have been as chaſte as I am! Fairer I think by much ( For yet your Faces Like Ancient well-built Piles ſhew worthy RuinesY After that Angel Age, turn mortal Devils! For Shame, for Womanhood, for what you have been: (For rotten Cedars haveborn goodly Branches) If you have hope of any Heav'n but Court Which like a Dream you't find hereafter vaniſh : Or at the beſt but ſubje&X to Repentance !- Study no more to be ill fpoken of | Let Women live themſelves; if they. muſt fail; Their own Deſtruction find 'em:” © Ard. You we ſoexcellent inall. - That I muſt tell it you with Admiration'! So true a joy you have, ſo ſweet a fear! And when you come to Anger—Tis ſo noble- That for my own part | could ſtill offend. To hearyou-angry : Women that want that” And your way guided (elfe I count it nothing). Are cither Fools or Fearful.
Phorhb. She were no Miſtreſs for the World's great Lord Could ſhe not frown a raviſht Kifs from Anger, And ſuch an Anger as this Lady ſhews us - — Stuck with ſuch pleaſing Dangers (Gods1 ask yee) -. Which of you all could hold from?
Luacin. I perceive yon, : Your own dark Sinsdwell with you and that price You fell the Chaſtity of modeſt Wives at,
Run to. Diſeaſes wi 4
”
you—l1 deſpiſe you, Re)
{ARMY p with; BY | 7 - 4 11.1:10% i o fl 4
Ner all the Glories ſubject tO a Ceſar /. PLE TC 'The Honours that he offers for My Honour,” EET The Hopes; the Gitts, apd everlaſting Flaneriss, | | Ree Nor any thing that's His, and apt. to tempt;”. | 2 -No! n>t to be the Mother of the Empire Ei | _— : And Queen of all thz holy Fires-he-w vribips, Ms © Can make a VVhore,of. © .....; 077 tiny Ge _ Ard. You. miſtake us, Madam. | op - 0 Lacia. Yet tell him this,! tfras thus much weaken 4 ws 5 Y That I have heazd-his Slaves and you hisMatrons. ” . Fit Nurſes for his Sigs! ayhich Gods forgive me | But ever to be leaning tohisFolly, , 7 © .. RE S Or to be brovght to love bis. Yice+=—Affure ] him I And from her Mouth, whoſe Life ,hq!l FAKEs it certain,” © x I never can ; I have a Noble Husband .. | <7. DO Pray tell him that too : Yet a Nolleta ne... CE ns Ol
A Noble Family, and laſt A Conſcience. : TS Thus much þy way of Anſwer ;-for your ſelyes Sh | i You have livd the ſhame of VVomen—die the better. LP q
Ard. Even as ſhe faid;todie. I 0h 20.5; 70 For there's no living here 2nd VVomen thus, | *,: 17" F am fure for us two. ; -; EE. _ es 7 F Pher. Nothing ſtick upon: her Ms: | 3502 11,30 0 5
. Yet you may halr if good Lnek ſerve !
Ard. So Godly — 25 ON | 5 F: 02 Thisis ill Breeding, Phorba. on 023 v2 "xl DO Phor. If the YVomen - | : F Should have a longing now to ſeethe Monſter
Bur if it be T1 have the” Young SIT NOS 3 _ =Came—let*spo think—ſhe on ag...
—u Th TRAGEDY «- TY
+
Aud all the Nets you have pitcht to.catch my Virtue,
! $42 SR 4 ike Spiders wees I {weep away before Wins cs - Oy ; Go! tell th Emperor, . Youhaye, x, a omar - 5 nfs
lon; Fhich is God-liks,* ff ”
'That neither his 040 Per
' The VVorld he rules, nor i hat that. VVorl id can purchaſe,
Phor. VVhat's now- to do.2 -
Ard. VVe have loſt a Maſs of Money. Art Wu Vina, i Phor. VVorms take her, | ;
Sth # [RY 44 M82 hi 4 Z
ſhe convert 'em all ! Ard. That way be, Phorka |
muſt not ſcape 1 us thus. [Zxcunt.” * ACT.
VALENTINIAN,
ACT. IL SCEN.L
The Scene opens, and : diſcovers the Emperor at Dice. | Maximus. Lycin. Proc. aud Chylax. = Gs
— N77; fet my Shand out: "Tis not juſt " 4k E ſhould match my Luck when'tis ſo-proſp'rqus: / Chy. If T have any thing toſet you, Sir, but Cloaths - And good Conditions, let me perth ; You have all my Money. | _ Proc. And mine.- Rs Lycin. And mine too. - SE Max. You may truſt us fure till t6: SehoribNr, = Or if you pleaſe, T1 ſend home for Money preſently. | - Emp. Tis already Morning, and ſtaying will be exons. My Luck will vaniſh ere your Money comes. 2 Chy. Shall we redeem *em if we ſet git Houſes?"
Emp. Yes turly. OE: | [429 TT Chy. That at my Y7 7 PROBES 27 : Emp. At it ——Tis mine. QA
Chy. Then farewel, Fig-Trees: For T-can nex + rode Einp VVhoſets?——Set + ang; thidg: FOE a. Lycian. At my Horſe. - bi. Emp. The Dapple Spaniard ? HEHE Lycin. He. 7 ds RICH" Emp. He's mine. : rt Lycin. He is fo.” | Max. Hah! | Lycin. Nothing, my Lord! But Pox on my Damn'd Fortnae. * . Emp. Come Maximus ; You were not wont to _ = Max. By Heaven, Sir, I have not a Penny. . -— = Emp. Then that Ring. © 1544
Max. O:Good Sr, This was not given to loſe. TD | Pup. Some I Sn. Si RE ONO
* Slay Ir.
- . 0 -
"-*Sifong.
25 The TRAGEDY ff
. Ti mine.
Fl bring you—what you pleaſe to think it worth.
i. 5 _ - 2 [ Sy-4 F
F + et $1 f
WY "#04: MATCEOR 45.4% (IK 40 wY
kt AI +; _ __ | | WRT 1 hy
| pies ating ſent to pay 'em. all. IN}
ax. Shall I redeem DS PR : 2 VYhen you pleaic to M0 2 oi. day as you will : I do not care ; | we Oaly tor ok 5 you throw: "Es | CE There Sir, W1 ET i Why then have -at it _y the-laſt fake t-- -
Max. Y are ever hrmnate ' to morrow
i Then your Arabian. Horſe : bur for: this: night Q op paoing Vito © ew all,
. DE Balbus... - MN Balb. From the Camp | of oom atone. ſent theſe Letters; Sir 5 6a --., YM
It ſeems the Cohorts-mutiny for Pay: = Maximus —This1s il News.Next week theyare' to march. You muſt away immediately ; no.ſtzy,.—- -.- , lite herb x15 No, not fo much as:to- take teaveatbome., -_- - ,, it, by DE This careful haſte may probably appeaſe <M;. es Send word, what aretheir Numbers ;.
not dela Jay a momens, Sir, . | Een be IE ae The EIS) you in this ani0d for ever. TEM: _ Emp. Tie 'em march my ſelf. - pn pe nt Max. Gods ever keep you-— Dn IA Max. Emp. To what end now deethink this Si, ſhall ferve 2..: For you arethedullft and the verieſt Rogues yo Fellows that know only byroat as Birds Rd = _ 'tis s fr ths MY _ : Blockhead! w : Her - ay -qaa 4 wctiend of the be Lady? 2 I " ox: Faith, Sr, that Lhe. |. ”
mp
"ES
S
-E aaa ont
VALENTINIAN. > Emp. Then pray for him that does——— C Exie Chylax. . Fetchin the Eunuch ; ET FEE BEE HEY You! See tl'Apartment made very fine | That lies upon the Garden, Masks and Muſick,
With the beſt ſpeed you can. And all your Arts. Serve to the higheſt for my Maſter-piece net Is now on foot. os n— eo HR Proc. Sir,. we ſhall havea care. | Emp. 1 ſleep an houror two; and let the Womea
Put on a graver ſhew of Welcome / pe |
Your Wives / they are fuch Haggard-Bawds Sa OR. Toric
A Thought too eager. - [Enter Chyl. aud Lycis. . Chy. Here's Lycias, 'Sir. <7 BE gen
Lyc. Long Lite to mighty Cefar- Farp. Fortune to thee, ,for I muſt uſe thee Lycias. Lyc. I am the humble Slave of Cefars Will, .
By my Ambition bound to his Commands . | IFLALY
As -by my duty. + UL WELL Emp. Follow me. CI TED) Lyc. With Joy.— * ; [_Excant.
SCENE 2. GROVE and FOREST...
Enter Lucina. Lucin. Dear ſolitary Groves where Peacedoes dwell Sweet Harbours of pure Love and Innocence { :
How wullinghy coul21 for ever ſtay
Beneath the ſhade of four embracing Greens, . _ Liſtning to Harmony of warbling Birds, + Y. Upon whoſe Banks in vanous Livery
The fragrant offspring of the early Year
Their Heads like graceful Swans bent proudly down, . See their ownBeauties in the Cryſtal Flood >
Of-thefe I could myſterious Chaplets weave,
Tun with the gentle Murmurs of the Streams,
- Expreſling ſome kind innocent Deſign W = E z "To
_—
a 7" Rn k 3 S ene Ed 7 py $7 - F=33 _ = ES > - S ? - COLES = _— 4 } — 2 = - - .- -—_ 1 b = be £ TIT" ES 23 ps =9 —_ 2 2 LID p A . ya {26-5 5 wa «# , = TW - FA - =. __ = AE — = ; = = : : — : _ pq > 4 —_—
28 Te TRAGEDY ff
Ti Maximus at his Return - To endly chiding "make his Heart confels How far my ypc —_ | ues 3 . A Court or clamorous Camp
| My Ears of his dear Words they wiſh to hear ' My longing Arms of tt'Embrace they covet :
Ta change. theſe humble Roos and ſit above.
re Ph
contentious Rk my Eyes of what they love to ſee,
« Sz 2 4
WE > 5: - #8 £21 Las =. LR - 1 PEN we < 7 =F _ % . A A Fa. * 4 * -.
Forgive me, Heay'n / if when I theſe enjoy, So perfett is the happineſsT find _ That my Soul fatisfid feels no Ambition
HORS Enter Marcellina..
Marc. Nfadam, My Lord juſt now alighted here, Was by an Order from th'Emperor
Call'd back to Court!
This he commanded me to let you know, And-that he would make haſte in his Feturn.
Lucin. The Emperor ! ' Unwonted Horror ſeizes me all o're, When but hear him nam'd : fure 'tis not Hate ; For tho his. impious Love with ſcorn 1 heard,
And fled with terror from his threatning force Duty commands me humbly to forgive - And blefs the Lord to whommy Lord does bow ! Nay more tnethinks he is the graccfulteſt man, His Words fo frand to tempt, himſclf to pleaſe, That 'tismy wonder how the Pow'rs above, Thoſe wiſe and careful Guardians of the Good, Have truſted ſuch a force of tempting Charms To Enemies declar'd of Innocence! .* Tis then ſome ſtrange Prophetick Fear I feel Fhar ſeems to warn me of approaching Ills. Go Aarcellina, fetch yourLute, and ſing that Song My Loxd. calls his : Titry to wear away ' : Th Melancholy Thoughts his Abſence breeds! ome gentle Slumberswr your flattcring Arms
*T# ><
- Let her ſcorn me, let her fly me ,
Tilbury theſe Difquiets of my Mind [Cv re Þ ov CE Till Maximus returns—for when he's here | | My Heartis rai'sd above the reach of Fear.
Marcellina fing.
SONG. By Mr. W.
Here wou d coy Aminta ran | From a deſpairing Lowers Story * L
When her Eyes have Conqueſis won, © TER Why fhou'd her Ear refuſe the Glory ?
Shall a Slave whom Rackes conflrain Be forbidden to complain ?
Let ber Lookes her Life deny me. | Ne're can my Heart change for Relief, — | Or my T ongue ceaſe to tell my Grief,, - © + © Mauch to Love and much to Pray Is to Heaven the only Way.
Mar. She ſleeps. [The Song ended, Exeunt Claudia _ .
and Marcellina before the Dance.
SCENE 3. Dance of Satyts.
Enter Claudia and Marcellina to Lucina.
Claud. Prithee, what ails my Lady, that of late +
She never cares for Company. - Marc. 1 know not : Unleſs it be that Company caufes Cuckolds.
Claud. Ridiculous ! That were a Childiſh Fear 7? f "Tis Opportunity does cauſe *em rather, &e © When two made one are glad to be alone. _
Marc. But Clasdia—Why this ſitting up all Night”
nite et”;
/
—_— — &- = : WEE _ . 282445 = > - —_——  — ——- 2747 - : = - m = —— = _—_ Lo P4 -—. - 247.2500 £4" 2 = ang - = _ Dx ws = . — - - - —"— =
== == — === 5 = : FE p — = |.:, A E . J” - _ - OS - —= - 4 _ 4 T— I IEEE, Fang WG 4 Ty : ” PI > CB E 768 men
© > wp EE = Et : ——_— E= | 4 IIS > Sn ene rn wa, n= 21 ce onus © SED. dn = G _ A 4 6 -— = - = —=q——— -- ? be - uot ESS 20 Es = oat © 5 - - _-= — Ie AP. 3 DEPRESS II -- _
-. 2 Ce —— ——_—_————_— - _—_- —— —— £ I I METH: ST IS FS ro bed = NY & _ = FTE - = J—— A - - - _= = ” Py ro 2” FA 22,=-:124- os =T " 1 z - {ac 3-3 4 - EC _—_—=- —==T; - —= = —_—— —— om ” 4x —-X-\. 3} 4 24 S_- - + - " =_ _ a S=== > _ - £ TR — Aetna FEES ior I ru——_——— <= L = £ J5n Haba Ty AS + © ++ $5 age gag © oe on - _—_— J x Fn NT = 2 = PD r] bv EEE IM ENLL! _— FRI Os 344 Ss ugg edz ew —y ao EE == DT ee hn A === = _ —_ — — — — - _ F - Z — = W- Eee I Thos: Sri = "EVE It Hee Br - B- eee EPA Ao HAS Pt SES RSA Aion” * 004 USE gy Dees] ts AE 24a, = , —==—— ' 4 Ez —_ £ vt k & LA ARDR. ES Das 4. - 5 > ——_— . , - 5 Y TP f : P 4 - - p s T == F k 4 [2
* Clardia. Thou art the fraileſt Creature, Marcellina !
; = Were pourd upon my Soul with equal Torture :
'G ins ſtreams 2 This argues Heat / contour which are main Corrupters / Tark when vou wall ; Your | L2dics that have Vapors, ;
_ They are not Flinchers, that inſulting Spleen © F Is the Artillery of pow'rful Luft ; | Diſcharg'd upon weak Honour which fands out 'Two Fits of Head-Ach, at the moſt, then yields.
And think-{tall Womens Honours like thy own / So thin a Cobweb that each blaſt of Paſſion Can blow away : But for my own part, Girl / I think Imay ke wall ftifd: Honours Martyr. With firmeſt Conftancy I have endurd
The raging Heats of paffionate Deſires! | While tlaming Love and boyling Nature both
tht bene kgs aids "0K wy
: Tarard with Reſolution ſtood it out : . And kept my Honour fafe. = - Marc. Thy Glory's great /
DT FORE 25 IO NOD . ad o
ED But, Clazdia, Thanks'to Heaven that T am made > _ The weakeſt of all women: -franvd ſo frail ' = That Honour neer thought fit to chuſe me ont, = His Champion againſt Plcafure : my poor Heart _F = For divers years {till toſt from Flame to Flame, þ 'E Is now burnt up to Tinder every Spark : M E Dropt from kind Eyes ſetsit a-fire afreſh, w- £ Preſt by a gentle hand I melt away, + E One Sigl?s a Storm that blows me all along ; _ . Pity a wretch, who has no Charm at all, | + Againſt th'impetuous Tide of flowing Pleaſure, [4 E Who wants both Forceand Courage to maintain : x The glorious War made upon Fleth and Blood, * . = Bart is a Sacrifice toevery with | BD | And has no power left to reſiſt a Joy. 7. : Claud. Poor Gvl! How ſtrange a Riddle Yirtue is > Fo 1EY never mm 1 ao nallblo i. ao + = : TLIC WIKO-PC Ttnot-: : E - And they who have it ever find a want. ; I. With what Tranquility and Peace thou liv'ſt 7 4 For ſtripr of Shame; Thou haſt no cauſe to fear.; b TE HED TORE Imerr Aon = —-
2 —————— O_—— OO q
& = -- e my « 5mÞ 4 > * I =. % >. . Y S X + 3 $, £S %E. £ £ '$ > 1 . * ;
'VALENTINIAN.
While I rhe Slave of Virtue am afraid .
Orcevery thing I ſee: And think the World ©
A dreadtul wilderneſs of favage Beaſts ;
Each man I meet [ fancy will devour me z; And fway'd by Rules not natural but afleted I hate Mankind for fear of being lov'd.
Marc. *Tisnothing leſs than Witchcraft can conſtrain
Still ro perſiſt in Errors we perceive? Prithee reform ; what Nature proniptsus to, And Reaſon ſeconds, why ſhould we avoid 2 This Honour is-the verieſt Mountebank, It fits our Fancies with -affefted Tricks , And makes us freakiſh ; what a Cheat muſt that be Whichrobs our Livesof all their foſter hours, 3 Beauty, our only Treaſure it lays-waſte..”
Harries us over our neglected Youth,
Tothe deteſted ſtate of Age and Uglinels,
Tearing our deareſt Hearts 5 Deſiews trom us.
Then in reward of what ittook away
Our Joys, our Hopes, our Wiſhes and Delights -
It bountifully pays us all with Pride / |
a
\ Poor ſhifts! "ſtill to be proudand never pleas'd,
Yet this is all your Honour can do for you. - | Claud- Concluded bke thy felf, for ſure thou art .
The moſt corrupt corrupting thing alive,
Yet glory not too much: in cheating Wit... _ .
"Tis but falſe VViſdom ; and its Property; /. :
Has ever been to take the part of - Vice, .
VVhich tho' the Fancy with vain ſhows it phaks,, :
Yet wants4-pewer. to fathe the Mind., ;
7
Claud. But ſee my Lady wakes and comes this waz >;
Bleſs me ! how pale and how confus'd ſhe looks ! Luc. -In what Fantaſtique new world have I been ?
 Lucina wakes. y
_
gt 6 OE WE IT! k 6 i. _
VVhar Horrors paſt > what threatning Viſions feen >
VVrapt as I lay in my amazing Trance, The Hoſt of Heav'n and Hell did round me Dance: .
_— — —— —_—
22 Te TRAGEDY ff :
\tec aroſe betwixt the Pow'rs above And theb Lelow : Methoughts they talkt-ot Love. And nam'd me often ; but 1t could not be Of any Love that had to do with me. For all the while they talk'd and argu'd thus, ; E never heard one word of Maximas- Diſcourtcous Nymphs / who own theſe murmuring Floods And you unkind Divinities o'tly VVoods ! . VVhen to your Banks and Bowers I came diftreſt Half dead throw Abſence ſeeking Peace and Reſt. VVhy would you not proteft by theſe your Streams A ſkeping wretch from ſuch wild diſmal Dreams / Miſhapen Monſters round in Meaſures went |  Horrid in Form with Geſtures inſolent ; . | - Grinning throw Goariſh Beards with half clogd Eyes, = They look'd me in the face frighted to riſe / In vain T did attempt, methoughtno Ground VVas to ſupport my ſinking Footſteps / found. ; E.- In clammy Fogs like one halt choak'd I lay, RE Crying for help my Voyce was ſnatch'd away. | { . And whenlI would have fled, A
- My Limbs benumm'd, ordead. 13-7", nl Could not my-Will with Terror wing'd obey > Upon my abſent Lord for help I cry'd 7
- But in that Moment when I muſt have dy'd : =P - With Anguiſh of my Fears confuſing pains "2 Relenting Sleep loosd his Tyrannick Chains *Þ
Clayud. Madam, Alas ſuch Accidents as theſe  . An part #] axpmocs nh your Peace / 5 |
e cold damp-Dews of Night have mixt and wrought) "Y With the dark Mato your Thought. git S And throu' your Fancy theſe Tikiſions brought. E I till have markt your Fondneſs will afford .-* No hour of Joy in tht abſence of my Lord. |
. Emter
— —  —
+ f - = 4 | 1 Rs p Mi WEI t " 4 <f , 7 4 1+ $%4, ; 491 <3 » } 1 hats 4 eter] An; TE 7.5 250 'þ CF w .
wer
VALENTINIAN 323 Enter Lycias. | = Ring 4
Lacin. Abſent, all night—and never fend me word 2 LyciasMadam,while ſleeping by thoſe Banks you lay/ One from my Lord commanded me away. In all obedient haſte I went to Court, Where buſie Crowds confus'dly did reſort ; News from the Camp it feems was then arriv'd Of Tumults raisd and Civil Wars contriv'd ; The Emperor frighted from his Bed does call Grave Senators to Council in the Hall Throngs of ill-favour'd Faces fill'd with Scars Wait for Employments praying hard for Wars At Council Door attend with fair pretence :
In Knaviſh Decency and Reverence
Banquers, who with officious Diligence— Lend Money to ſupply the preſent need
At treble Uſe that greater may ſucceed, C So publick Wants will privatePlenty breed, Whiſpring in every Corner you might ſee.
Lucin. But what's all this to Maximusand me 2 Where is my Lord.? what Meſſage has he ſent > | Is he in Health > What fatal Accident, c Does all this while his wiſht Return prevent ? .
Lycias. When ere the Gods that happy hour decree, May he appear fafe and with Vidtory ;
Of many Hero's who ſtood Candidate
To be the Arbiters 'twixt Rome and Fate ;
To quell Rebellion and protect the Throne
A Choice was made of Maximus alone ;
The People, Souldiers, Senate, Emperor
For Maximes with one confent concur.
Their new-born hopes now hurry him away, Nor will their Fears adnut one moments ſtay : Trembling through Terror leſt hecome too late They haddle his Diſpatch while at the Gate © The Emperor's Chariots to condutt him wait.
F Laucis.
bu
_ _ — "2 Om.
> - _ | F. [i]
6h "TR My 1 of
: q Wo +
Th TRAGEDY off
a1 Honours my direDream foretold! Why thould the Kind be ruin by the Bold ?.
Heel to the Army g9 and there be kill'd. Forgettal of my Love ; Hee 1 not afford | The eaſie Favour of a parting Word-; c Ofall my Wiſhes hee's alone the Scope area ff 4 And hee's the only End of all my Hope, My fill of Joy, and what is yet above : Joys, Hopes, and Wiſhes—He is all myTLove:: | CE Myſterious Honour tell me what thou art! | TS - That takes up diffrent Forms in every Heart ; . And doſt to diverſe Ends and Intereſts move | 8 : Conqueſt is his—my Honour 1s my Love. > Both theſe do Paths ſo-oppoſitely chuſe By following one you muſt the other loſe. So two ſtrait Lines from the ſame Point begun Can never meet, tho' without end they run Alas, I rave ! : Lycias. Look en thy Glory, Love; and ſmile to fee: Two faithful Heartsat ftrife for Viftory ! Who Llazing in thy facred Fires contend While both their equal. Flames to Heav'nafcend, The God that dwells in Eyes light on my Tongue Left in my Meſlage I his Paſſion wrong ; | You!l better gueſs the Anguith of his Heart, ' From what you feel, then what I can impart ; : — But Madam, know the Moment was come, His watchful Eye perceiv'd me in the Reom : | When with a quick precipitated haſte . From Czfar's Boſom where he ſtood embracd Piercing the buſie Crowd to me he Daſt———— TOs hems his Orders in his Hand - TIE IFarce reath to give this : With thy beſt ſpeed to - Lacina ay '—mazed, : & Towſt part unicen by her Idy, *
> + rn 6 6 hank Mob ITY op ew oo piget a: F
—_—
YES .'Decrees:
+ ; 2, Tohehennnen brody ty og pies: 2 4 Lb ” F,
—_—_—__—_—_— —— — —— — _— — — —_ ——— —_— — — — 4
VALENTINIAN. tx
Decrees inevitable from above, A111 Fate which takes too little Care of Love, Fo'ce me away : Tell her'tis my Requeſt, By thoſe kind Fires ſhe kindled in my Breaſt ; Our tuture Hopes and all that we hold dear, She inſtantly wou'd come and ſee me here. That parting Gricfs to her I may reveal And on her Lips propitious Omens ſeal. Aﬀairs that preſs in this ſhort ſpace of time Aford no other place without a Crime ; And that thou mail} not tail of wiſht for Ends In a ſuccefs waereon my Life depends Give her this Ring. { Looks on the Ring.
Lacin. How ſtrange ſoever theſe Commands appear Love awes my Reaſon, and controuls my Fear. But how couldſt thou employ thy laviſh Tongue So idly to be telling this ſo long 7 When evry moment thou haſt ſpent in vain, Was haltthe Life that did to me remain. Flatter me, Hope, and on my Wiſhes ſmile, And make me happy yet a little while. If through my Fears I can ſuch Sorrow ſhow Asto convince l periſh if he go : Pity perhaps his Gen'rous Heart may move To facrifice his Glory to his Love. -T1 not deſpair / | | Who knows how eloquent theſe Eyes may prove | Begging in Floods of Tears and Flames of Love. [Exzt Lucina.
Lyczas. Thanks to the Devil, my Friend, now all's our bs.
How eaſily this mighty work was done / Well 7 firſt or laſt all Women muſt be won « Tt is their Fate and cannot be withſtood « The wife do ſtill comply with Fleſh and Blood ; « Or if through peeviſh Honour Nature fail ; <« They do but loſe their Thanks ; Art will prevail LExie.
[
F 2 SCENE
2 OE I ny ey
—_
Ta: 5... - <- = a 3655 T = ms -
4 a ACE CER end 7 = -
_ —_—
7 +
36 Th TRAGEDY of
SCENE: 4 Enter Acius perſuing Pontis, and Maximus following.
Max. Temper your ſelf, AFcius. Pent. Hold,my Lord—Tam a Souldier and a Roman! Max. Pray Sir / DE Zcigs. Thou art 4 Vp. born and a Traytor. Give me my ſelf, or by the Gods, my Friend,, You make me dang'rous: How dar'ſt thou pluck. The Souldiers to Sedition and I living > And fow Seeds of rank Rebellion even then VVhenT am drawing out to Action 2 Pont. Hear me / Max. Are you a man 2 Fins. lam true, Maximus /
| And if the Villain live, we are diſhonourd. |
Max. But hear him what he can ſay /
Acins. That's the way To pardon him, I am fo cafie-Natur'd, That if he ſpeak but humbly, I forgive hin.
Port. 1 do beſeech you, worthy General /
ins. has found the way already. Give me roem, And if he ſcape me then, Hthas Mercy.
Pont. 1 do not call you VVorthy, that I fear you : I never card for Death; if you will kiltme , ©onſider firſt for what / not what you can do: "Tis zrue I know you aremy General ; And by that great Prerogative may kill ——
L£cius. He argues with me ! was ad & made-up finiſht Rebel. |
« Pray-confider what certain ground you hav
£Ecins. What Grounds ? OT Pe. Did | not take him preaching to the Souldiers, How lazily they liv'd ; and what diſhonour TT It was to ſerve a Prince fo full of Softneſ ! Theſe were his very Words, Sir.
Max. Theſe ! cies,
Ido'they were raſhly { poken, which was an Error,
” JR. - ot pt WU ” daft od td tak int
==} C5
dan? * Lane,
TRE LI0E | F
— —
VALENTINIAN. . > | 37 A great one, Pontjzs! yet from him that hungers * For War, and brave Employment might be pardon'd! © _ + The Heart, and harbourd Thoughts of ill makes Traytors <_— Nor ſpleeny Speeches ——— Ih _ #cins. Why ſhould you prote& him > Go to——it icarce ſhews honeſt | Max. Taint me not ! | Ee For that ſhews worſe, Aczus! All your Friend ſhip And that pretended Love you lay upon me ; (Hold back my Honeſty !) is like a Favour You do your Slave to day—to morrow bang him ; . Was I your Boſom-Fnend for this > Acius. Forgive me! So zealous 15 my Duty for my Prince, That oft it makes me to forget my ſelf ; And tho'I ſtrive to be without my Paſlton,.. I amnoGod, Sir ; For you whoſe infeQtion Has ſpred it ſelf ike Poyſon throu” tne Army, And caſt a killing Fogg on fair Allegiance | . + Firſt thank this Noble Gefitleman; you haddy'd ele : : Next from your Place and Honour of a Souldier . I here ſeclude you. \ Pont. May I ſpeak yet ?. Max. Hear him. Zcins. And while Z#cins holds a Reputation At leaſt Command ! you bear no Arms for Rome, Sir. Pont.Againſt her ] ſhall never : The condemn'd man .1 Hab yet the priviledge to ſpeak, my Lord, © Law were notequal clic. A: Max. Pray hear, Acins, . For happily the fault he has committed :* Tho I believe it mighty ; yet confider'd, If Mercy may be thought upon will prove : Rather a haſty Sin than heinous. | | cins. Speak. _ Pont. "Tistrue,my Lord,youtook me tir'd with peace *: My Words as rough and raggedas my Fortune, Telling the Souldiers what a man we ſerve Led from us by the Flouriſhes of Fencersz; My I bland him too for ſoltnels.
—_—
38 The TRAGEDY ff
jus. To the reſt, Sir. oy 'Tis true | told 'em too We lay at home to ſhew our Country We durſt go naked, durft want Meat and Money ; And when the Saves drink Wine, wedurſt be thirſty. [ told *em too the Trees and Roots Were our beſt Pay-maſters. Tis likely too I councelPd *em to turn | Their warlike Pikes to Plow-ſhares, their ſure Targets And Swords hatcht with the Blood of many Nations To Spades and Pruning-Knives: their warhke Eagles, into Dawsand Starlings. Acins. What think you Were theſe Words to be ſpoken by a Captain - One that ſhould give Example ? Max. "T'was too much. : Pont. My Lord! Idid not wooe'em fromthe Empire, Nor bid *em turn their daring Steel againſt Czfar ; The Gods for ever hate me it that motion Were part of me ; Give me but Employment And way to live , and where you find me vicious Bred up to mutiny, my Sword fhall tell you; And if you pleaie that Place I held maintain it 'Gainſt the moſt daring, Foes of Rome, I'm honeſt ? A Lover of my Country one that holds HisLife no longer His than kept for Czfar : Weigh not—{] thus low on my Knee befeech you! What my rude Tongue diſcover'd 'twas my want, No other part of Poxrzias ; You have ſeen me And you, my Lord, do ſomething for my Country, And both the wounds I gave and took Not like a backward Traytor. Fcius. All your Language Makes but againſt you, Pontius ! youare caft, Andby my Honour and my Love to Ceſar By me ſhall never be reftory in Camp ; 1 will not have a Tongue, tho' to himſelf Dare talk but near Sedition : As] govern
All ſhall obey, andwhen they want,their Duty
And ready Service ſhall redreis they needs,
Not prating what they wou'd be.
—— CM cv —
| VALENTINIAN, 3s. -
| & os Thus I leave you, Yet ſhall my Pray'rs, altho my wretched Fo j _ es. re Muſt tollow you no more ; be ſtil about you. Ty Gods give you where you fight the Victory ! i You cannot caſt my wiſhes. | | £Ecius. Come, my Lord ! b
I morn en tn nn ——— tr + coats
PIEIS 4
Now tothe Field again. Max. Alas poor Pontius ! -. © th
The End of the Third AF.
» FFT ko — " ” WY
| ACT. IV. SCEN. IL
Enter Chylax at one Door, Lycinius ad Balbns ar another. -
Eye. Ow now ! 4 Chy. Shee's come. Balb. Then T1 to the Emperor! | LEx,Balb. Chy. Is the Muſick plac'd well > | TE Lyc. Excellent. Chy. Lycinius, you and Procalzs receive *em: In the great Chamber at her Entrance. Lycin. Let us alone. Chy. And do you here Lycinins. Pray let the Women ply her farther off. And with much more Diſcretion, one word more: Are all che Maskers ready > Lycin. Take no care man. [_ Ex- Chyl. T am all over in a Sweat with Pumping; "Tis a laborious moyling 'Trade this —
Fnter Emperor, Balb. aud Procul.
Emp. Is ſhe come 2 Chy. She is, Sir ! but *twere beſt That y ou were laſt feen to her.
Emp.
zo Te TRAGEDY of
Emp. So I mean.
Keep your C £ L Prec. Tis done Sir. Emp. Be not too ſudden to hier.  Chy. Good ſweet Sir Retireand Man your ſelf: Let us alone, Weareno Children this way : One thing Sir! Tis neceſfary, that her She-Companions Be cut off in the Lobby by the Women, They'lbreak the Buſineſs elſe. | Emp. "Tis true : They ſhall. Chy. Remember your Place, Proculus . Proc. I warrant you C Ex. Emp. Balb. and Proculus.
Enter Lacina, Claudia, Marcellina and Lycias.
Chyl. She enters / Whowaits there > The Emperor Calls forhis Chariots; He will take the Air. Lacin. Iam gladT came in ſuch a happy hour VVhen hee'l be abſent : This removes all Fears ; But Lycias lead me to my Lord, Heav'n gram he be not gone. Lyc. *'Faith, Madam, that's uncertain / 1 run and ſee. But if you miſs my Lord And find a Letter to ſupply his Room, A Change ſo happy will not diſcontent you— C£ Exir- Lec. VVhat means that unwonted Inſolcnce of this Slave 2 Now IT beginto fear again. Oh—Honour, If ever thou hadſt Temple in weak VVoman And Sacrifice of Modeſty offer'd to Thee Hold me faſtnow and Be be fafe for ever. Chy. The iair Lucina; Nay thenl find Cur Slander d-Cour hasnot ſinn'd up fo high Toiright all the good Angels from its Care, Sincethey have ſent fo great a Bleſing hither. Madam—I Leg tirAdvantage of my Fortune, I _—; VVhoasI am the firſt have met you here, = | May humbly hope to be made proud and happy VVith the honour of your firſt Command and Service. Lucia. Sr—i am © far from kno; 10g how to Merit
7 our
Marc. Now Claudia, for a Wager, What thing is this that cringes to my Lady >
Claud. Why ſome grave States-man, by his looks a Courtier.
Marc. Claudia a Bawd : By all my hopes a Bawd ! What uſe can reverend Gravity be of here, To any but a truſty Bawd ? States-men are markt for Fops by it, beſides Nothing but Sin and Lazinefs could make him So very fat, and look fo fleſhy owt. Lzcin. But is my Lord not gone yetdo you ſay Sir? Chy. Hetsnot Madam, and muſt take this kindly, Exceeding kindly of you, wondrous kindly, You come fo far to viſit him. Ple guide you. Laciz. Whither? Chy. Why tomy Lord. Lacin, Is it impoſlible To find him in this Place without a Guide, +» + For I would willingly not trouble you ? Chy. My only trouble, Madam, is my fear, F'm too unworthy of fo great an Honour. But here you'rein the publick Gallery, Where th' Emperor muſt paſs, unleſs you'd ſee him.
Lacin. Bleſs meSir—No—pray lead me any whither, My Lord cannot be long before he finds me. [Exennt.
Emter Lycinius, Proculus, ed Balbus. Muſick. Lycin. She's coming up the Stairs : now the Muſick,
I®
Till ſhe melts down. Then Ceſar lays his Stamp. Burn theſe Perfumes there. Proc. Peace, nonoiſe without. :
G
l þ d "ll | il
! | i | | ! | q
, hw = > < Es : CO EP RE
_ | Wi - , o- 772267 4 wy : = —_ or "1 >. 9 -# - , : mules: &+ 44k} 4 247 et WE ths ae TEES. +- ba , 8 er Wu genent WINS, WEL, - rn HE 4:30 wk & 24 WE <a Sau Per 1 pct re HEEL bp en - $6 6G 4, ed YRGREGAcS xs £2048 udp» IT & %
_— _ ———— Oe _—_—_ P 3K. wo 7 :
—CT——_— x =
The TRAGEDY of
2 by A SONG.
Nymph.
I Njuriows C harmer of my vanquiſht Heart,
Canft thou feel Love, and yet no pity know £
Since of 2 felf from thee T cannot part, | pads "5.6 gentle Way to let me go.
For what with Joy thou diaſt obtain, , And Iwith more did give 3 | Tr time will make thee falſe and vain, And me unfit to live.
Shepherd. Frail Angel,that wow” dft leave a Heart forlory, With vain pretence falſhood therein might the ; Seek not to caft wild ſhadows ore your ſcorn, You cannot foontr change than I can dye. To tediows life I'le never fall, Thrown from thy dear lov d DBreaft 3 He merits not to live at all, © Who cares to live unbleſs.
Oae... 4 SL
Then let our flaming Hearts be jojuid, While in that ſacred fire;
Ere thou prove falſe, or I unkind, Together both expire.
Emer Chyl. Lucina, Claudia, Marcellina:
Lucin. Where is this Wretch, this Villain Lycias? Pray Heavn my Lord be here; for now I fear it. [ amcertainlyberrayd. Thiscurſed Ring Is either counterfeit or ſtoln. Claxd, Your fear ' ©: Does but diſarm your Reſolution, Which may defend you inthe worſt Extreams : Orif that fail. Are there not Godsand Angels? Laciz. Noneinthis Place I fear but evil ones, Heav'n pity me. ' Chy. But tell me, deareſt Madam How do you like the Song? ;
Lucan.
VALENTINIAN.
LONG LED EI GSD ALY £0 PRA 2 ED Muſick, and the words, I '
gorges an Ana.
Chy. The Emperor | Hasthe beſt Talent at expounding 'em; | You! ner _ aLeſlon of his Teaching. |
Lucin. Are you the worthy Friend of Maxim Would lead mevo him? He ſhall thank you Sir. i As youdefire. - ;
| Chy. Madam, he ſhall not need, Thave a Maſter will reward my Service, OL When you have made him happy with your Love, | For which he hourly languiſhes ——Be kind—— * [Whifpere. Lucin. The Gods ſhall kill me firſt. NEE Chy. Think better ont. : Fs : 'Tis ſweeter dying in th' Emperor's Arms.
43
Emtr Phorba and Ardellix.
But here are Ladies come to fee you, Madam, . * They 1 entertain you better. I but tire youz-' © Therefore Fle leave you for awhile, and bring - A Yourlov'd Lord to you — | 44-2. 7 Tat Lucin. Then Tle thank you. Iam betray*d for certain. |  Phorh. You are a welcome Woman. Ard. Bleſs me Heaven ! | mos How did you find your way to Court? + Lxcin. [ know not; would I had never trodit. _ Phorb. Prithee tell me. [Caf Emperor behind. Good pretty Lady, and dear ſweet Heart, loveus, For we love theeextreamly. Isnot this Place A Paradiſe to live in? Py | Lacin. Yes to you,
o-
Who know no Paradiſe but guilty Pleaſure.
Ard. Heard you the Mufick yet? ChE
Lacin. *T was none to me. COOK 349
Phor. Youmuſtnot be thus froward. Well, this Gown + Is one oth? prettieſt, by my troth Ardelia, ©
Lever ſaw yet; 'twas not to frown in, Madam. | G 2 You
14 I Tr C7 ga ek . WS: of DALE I
OPS | OT TE
5 2; br : bg et one ahucÞ 7 lobe dg £0
: © 82a : lat 4
_ - = LOT 7 arg; arg em —_— + \ 3 rag = hy bo ak *M ”- iS, +88 a, W374 marks | Sb i p | $+- AE IG ! ls 26 Ll | 44%: - : N 5, - — Tor 4 7 * wy V
ws The TRAGEDY of
You put this Gown on when you came. Ard. How dee ye?
* Alas, podr Wretch, how cold itis !
Lacin. Content you.
Lam as well as may be,and as temperate,
So you will let me beſo——Where's my Lord ?
For that's the buſineſs I come for hither. Phor. We'll lead you to him : he's ith Gallery. Ard. Wel ſhew you all the Court too.
Lacin Shew me him,8 you have ſhew'd me allI come tolook on.
Phor. Come on, we'l be your Guides; and as yon go,
We have ſome pretty Tales totell you, Madam,
Shall make you merry too. You come not hither
To be ſad, Lacine, Lacin. Would I might not— (Exennt.
Emter Chylax ard Balbus 7x haſte.
Chyl. Now ſe all ready, Balbas - run. Batb. Ifly Boy —— [ExiF. Chy. The Women by this time are warning of her,
If ſhe holds out them ; the Emperor
Takesher to task——he has her——Hark, I hear 'em.
Exter Emperor drawing in Lucina. Ring.
Emp. Would you have run away ſo lily, Madam >
Excin, | beſeech youSir, Confider what Lam, and whoſe.
Exp. Tdofa. . For what youare, Iam filfd with ſuch Amaze, So far tranſported with Deſire and Love, My ſlippery Soul flows to you while I ſpeak,
whoſe you were, I care not, for now you aremine
Who love you, and will doat on you more x 1 han you docn your Vertue.
Lacin. Sacred Ceſar.
Exp. You ſballnvt kneel to me: riſe,
Excin. Look upon me,
Andif you be {6 c1ud to abuſe me, | Think
þ [1 ſ
-— - — To rm gp
V ALENTINEAN.
Think how the Gods will takeit. Does this Face Aftlict your Soul? Hehide it from you ever; Nay more, I will become foleprous, That you ſhall curſe me fromyou. My dear Lord Has ever ferv'd you truly—fought your Battels, As if he daily longd to diefor Ceſar; Was never Traitor Sir, nor never tainted, In all the AQtions of his Life.
Emp. How high does this fantaſtick Vertue ſwell ? She thinks it Infamy to pleafetoo well. I know it——-
Lacin. His Meritsand his Famehave grown together,
Together flouriſh'd like two fpreading Cedars,
Over the Roman Diadem. Olet not.
(As you have a Heart'thats humane in you)
The having ofan honeſt Wife decline him;
Let not my Vertue be a Wedge to break him,
Much lefs my Shame his undeſcrv'd Diſhonour.
I do not think you are ſo bad a man;
I know Report belyes you z you are Ceſar,
Which is the Father of the Empires Glory :.
You are too near the Nature of the Gods,
To wrong the weakeſt of all Creatures, Woman. Exp. I darenot doit here. Riſe, fair Lucira.
When you believe me worthy, make me happy
Cizlax ; wait on her toher Lord within.
Wipe your fair Eyes ——
Ah Love ! ah curſed Boy!
Where art thou that torments me thus unſeen,
And rageſt with thy Fires within any Breaſt,
With idle purpoſe toinflame her Heart,
Whiek is asinacceſlible and cold,
As the proud topsof thoſe aſpiring Bulls,
Whoſe Heads are wrapt in es, Snow,
Tho? the hot Sun roll o'ze 'em every day ? And as his Beams, which only ſhincabove, Scorch and conſume in Regtons round below,
Soft Love which throws fuch brightneſsrhro' her eyes,
Leaves her Heart cold, and burns me at her feet ; My Tyrant, but her flattering Slavethou art,
—— ET.
Aſide. ks
[ Afrde.
[Exenn.
46 The TRAGEDY off A Glory round her lovely Face,a Fire within my Heart. Who waits without ? Lycinins £
Exter Lycintus.
in, My Lord. | : ry Where arethe Maſquers that ſhould dance to night? Lyciz. In the old Hall Sir, going now to pratiſe. Emp. About it ſtrait. *Twill ſerve to draw away Thoſe liſtning Fools, who trace itin the Gallery ; . Andifby chance odd noifes ſhould be heard, As Womens Shrieks, or ſo, fay,*tis a Play Is practifing within. Lycin. The Rape of Lzcrece, | Or ſome ſuch merry Prank—— It ſhall be done Sir. [ Ex. Emp. *Tis nobler like a Lion to invade, Where Appetite direds, and ſeize my Prey, Thanto wait tamely like a begging Dog, . Till dull Conſent throws out the Scraps of Love. I ſcorn thoſe Gods who ſeek to croſs my Wilbes, And will infpite of 'em be happy : Force Of all the Powers 15 the moſt generous ; For what that gives, it freely does beſtow, Without the after-Bribe of Gratitude. Tle plunge intoa Seaof my Deſires, And quench my Fever, tho? I drown my Fame, And tear up Pleaſure by the Roots : No matter Tho' it never grow again; what ſhall enſue, Let Gods and Fate look toit ; *tis their Buſineſs. [ Exh.
SCENE III. Opens and diſcovers 5 or 6 Dancing- maſters praTiſcng.
1 Das. That is the damn ſhnfflins Step. Pox 01? 2 Dan. I ſhall never hit it. Rn Thou haſt naturally
All the neat Motions of a merry Tai! a, thouſand Riggles with by Ton iowa, at clear and ſtrong : let thy Limbs Play about thee;
Keep
RC
VALENTINIAN. 4;
Keep time, and hold thy Back upright and firm: It may prefer thee to a waiting Woman. x Dar. Orto herLady, which is worſe.
Exmter Lycinius. [Ten dance.
T.zcir. Bleſsme, the loud Shricks and horrid Outcries
Of the poor Lady ! Raviſhing dye callit ? .
She roars as if ſhe wereupon the Rack :
"Tis ſtrange there ſhould be ſuch a difference
Betwixt he1f-raviſhing, which moſt Women love,
And through force, which takes away all Blame,
And ſhould be therefore welcome to the vertuous.
Thef: rumbling Rogues, I fear, have overhcard *em ;
But their Ears with their Brains are 1n their Heels.
Good morrow Gentlemen: ET HN
What is all perfe& 2? I have taken care | 197 91h
Your Habits ſhall be rich and glorious. | ET. 3 Dar. That will ſetoff. Pray fit down and fee, |
Hoy the laſt Entry I have made will pleaſe you.
Second Dance. |
Lycin, "Tis very fine indeed, | FR 2 Dax, Thope ſo Sir [Ex. Denoore. Enter Chyl. Proculus aud Lyciag. 9.) :
Proc. Tis done Lycinins.. - | 41 E pl | Lycin. How ? "IT ' | + -32- 4M» :
Proc. Ibluſh totellit. TM, Eee T9708 20 1 If there be any Juſtice, we are Villains, 7 OA And muſt be fo rewarded. £7 1rgl 216d Bihar wer]
Lycias.. Since 'tis done, 2m 426T I take it is not time now to repent 1t, | 54 26h W | Ler's make the beſt of our Trade... 7
Chy. Now Vengeance takeits. 797 7 ro | Why ſhould nothe have ſertl'd on a:Beauty; i 7. 090945 1 I
Whoſe Modeſty ſtuck in-a piece of Tiflue? © Þ 4. + t4 ft 0h - ff Or one a Ring might rule ? or ſuch a one [| That had a Husband itching to be honourable, = C || And ground to get ir? If be muſt have Women, ANG: mt
4 The TRAGEDY of
"d no allay without 'em, why not thoſe 7 hows the Myſtery, and are beſt able ; To play a Game with jadzment, ſuch as (he is? Grant they be won with Jong liege, endleſs travel, And brought to opportumities with milhons, Yet when they ceme to Motion, their cold Yertue Keeps em like Bedsof Snow. . Lxcin. A good Whore Had fav'd all this, and happily as wholſom, And the thing once done as well thought of too. But this fame Chaſtity forſooth. Chy. A Pox one. Os Why ſhould not Women be as free as we are ? They are, but will not own it, and fartreer, And the more bold you bear your {clf, more welcom, And there isnothing you dareſay but Truth, But they dare hear. Proc. No doubt of it —away, Let them who can repent, go home and pray. [Exenny
Scene opens, diſcovers th Emperor's Chambcr. Lucina newly un- bound by th* Emperor.
Emp. Youronly Vertuenow is Patience,
Be wile and fave your Honour ; if you talk ——. Lacin, As long as there is Life in thi» Budy,
And Breath togive me words, Fle cry for Juſtice. Ezyp. Juſtice will never hear you; I am Juſtice. Lacin, Wilt thou not kill me Monſter, Ravither ?
Thou bitter Bane o'th' Empire, look upon me,
And ifthy guilty eyes dare ſce the Ruines
Thy wild Luſt hath laid level with Diſhonour,
The facrilegiousrazing of that Temple,
The Tempterto thy black ſins would have bluſht at.
Behold, and curſe thy ſelf. The Gods will find thee, |
That's all my Refugenow, for they are righteous;
Vengeance and Horror circle thee. The Empire,
In which thou liv a firong continu'd Surfert,
Like
= ts Aa MIS — ER n————_ er —
—
VALENTINIAN. Like Poyſon will dif; orge thee 3 good menraze thee From ever being read agen; Chaſlt Wives and fearful Maids make Vows againft thee ; Thy worſt Slaves, when they hear ofthis, ſhall hate thee, And thoſe thou haſt corrupted, firſt fall rom thee, And if thou let'ſt me live, the Souldier Tired with thy Tyrannies break thro? Obedience, And ſhake his ſtrong Steel at thee. Emp. Thus prevails not, Nor any Agony you utter Madam : It I have done a fin, curſe her that drew me Curſe the firſt Cauſe, the Witchcraft that abus'd me; : Curſe your fair Eyes, and curſe that heav'nly Beauty, .
 Andcurſe your being good too.
Lucin. G\orious Thief!
What reſtirutton canſt thou make to ſave me ? Emp. Te ever love ——and ever honour you. Lucin. Thou canſtnotz
For that which was my Honour, thou haſt murder ;
And canthere be a Love in Violence?
Emp. You ſhall be only mine. : Lucin. Yet I like better . 2 Thy Villainy than Flattery 3 that's thy own, : The other baſcly counterfett. Fly from me, EE,
Or for thy fafeties ſake and wiſdom kill me 3
For I am worſe than thou art: Thou maiſt pray,
And fo recover Grace —1 am loſtfor ever,
Andif thou ler'ſt me live, thow'rt loſtthy ſelf too.
Emp. I fear noloſs but Love —1 ftand aboveit. | Lucin. Gods! what a wretched thing has this man mace me ?
For I am now no Wife for Maximus ;
No Company for Women that are vertuous 3
No Family Lnow can claim or Countrey,
Nor Name but C2ſar's Whore : Oh ſacred Ceſar !
{For that ſhouid be your Title) was your Empire,
Your Rods and Axes that are Types of Juſtice,
And fromthe Gods themſelves — toraviſh Wamen.
The Curſes that owe to Enemies, ev'n thoſe the Saubins fent,
When Romulzs (as thou haſt me) raviſhe their noble Maids,
Made more and heavier hght _
Emp.
= a _——_—_ os ——___ EIS. " w——_ ——— ———— I Er ts TE II rr
o The TRAGEDY of
. This helps not. | ; rp The = of Tarquin be remember'd inthee,
And where there has a chaſt Wite been abus'd,
_ Letitberhine, the Shame thine, thine the Slaughter, And laſt for ever. thine the feard Example. | Where ſhall poor Vertue live now I am fallen ?
What can your Honours now and Empire make me,
But a more glorious Whore 2 Emp. A better Woman. :
If you be blind and ſcorn it, whocanhelp it?
Come leave thefe Lamentations; you do nothing
But make a noiſe——1 am the ſame man ſtill,
Wereit to do agen: Therefore be wiſer 3by all
\This holy LightI would attempt it.
You are ſo excellent, and made to raviſh,
There were no pleafurein you elſe. Lacin. Oh Villain! | Emp. So bred for man's Amazement, that my Reafon
And every helpto do me right has left me:
The God of Love himſclf had been before me,
Had he but Eyestofee you, tell me juſtly
How ſhould I chooſe but err—- then if you wil}
Be mine and only mine (for you are foprectous)
I envy any other ſhould enjoy you;
Almoſt look on you, and your daring;Husband
Shall know he has kept an Off ring from th' Emperor,
Too holy for the Altars—— be the greateſt ;
More than my ſeif Fle.make you 3 it you will not,
Sit down with this and filence : for which wiſdom,
Yau ſhall have uſe of me, if you divulge it,
Know I am far above the faults I do,
AndthofcI do, I amableto forgive ;
And where your credit inthe telling of it
May be with gloſs enough ſuſpetted, mine
Is as my own Command ſhall make it. Princes
Tho' they be ſometimes ſubjx - Whiſ
Tet wear they two edg'd c et gd Swords tor opcn Cenſares 2 ror _— caunot help you, nor the Souldiers ; Tow usband is my Creature, they my WW eapon* ad only where 1 bid *cm firike—— C1 Ted wn,
Nez
a” —
VALENTINIAN.
Nor can the Gods be angry. at this' Aion * ' Who as they made me os Iraoonan happi Kh had neverbeen without egy ms Conſider, and farewel. You? my | Waiting without. NO EN Lucin. Deſtruction find thee. | Now whuch way ſhall [ go—my honeſt Houſe Will ſhake to ſhelter me—my Husband fly mi My Family, FR Becauſe they re honeſt, and defire to be ſo. - Is this the end of Goodneſs? This the price Of all my early pray*rsto prote& me ? Why thenlI ſee there is no God—but Power Nor Vertue now alive that cares for us, ;
But what 1s either lame or ſenſual ; How had I been thus wretched elſe >
Exter Maximus end X#cius. FEcias. Let Titas _ Command the Company that Poxtias loſt. Max. How now ſweet Heart! What makeyou here and thus? FEcins. Lucina weeping, _ This is ſome ſtrange offence. Max. Look up and-tell me. Why art thou thus? my Ring ! oh Friend I have found it! | You are at Court then;
5
[Ex. Emperor.
Lacin. This and that vile Wretch Lycias brought me hither. -
Max. Rife and go home. I have my Fears, Hicivr. Oh my beſt Friend! I amruin'd. Go "+ Songs Already inthy tears I've read thy Wrongs.
Already found a Cefer £ Gothou Lilly,
Thou ſweetly drooping Flower ; be gone, Ifay,
Andif thou dar'{t—outlive this Wrong, Lacin. I darenot.
AEcixs. Is thatthe Ring you loſt? Max. That, that /Ecis,
That curſed Ring, my ſelf and all my Fortuneshave undone. ft
Thus pleas'd th? Emperor, my noble Maſter, For all my Seryices and Dangers -p him, | 2
Tao
-
H # WL DE 4 ; "bb@-bett & hk Ms 14 F B a, l : Wer POde "_ . LM RO att thet EO re FS $4 > I 4 j k * | | HTO | | . CI # "ys ip £14 44 ge Ad TIS. 3% a Wi OY eels VB AEDT MA Rs 11] fe | 8:2 65847 MHz. a F w4 " kt wi FI $- Hae _ b inet - of ' : 41 i aps» tris "$f {r et : {4 n eb , |; ; | % y >a oy 6n.4 FOR mw. Y 4 { INaes 14-44 o# 915 BP" 6 # Wadi 5a 4 2 a - 4 SE by n , Gy $45 $4 + — TI | {1 > { Þi- ne þ a. od a Ft p 4 LCA *+-4 "340g in =2 FSC , WT, 9 4 Arn -— ; 6 a = F | b - * - ; i | | | | | ; : Ts + ' 8 S414 46+ + 15; \ %s 2 = 2 0 # + ris uy. OS a. ue : w : 59 wa . af Wy 2 30 - yak» RE EAT” page dy Ha : 5b, fn to {ne 4 * - OO - (
4wre.
ES he! i ade 4. W.4 pr MI 6-6 s RN SUSIE
e me my own Pandar ! was this Juſtice ? a _ FEcins Phavel livd tO bear this ? Lucin, Farewel for ever SIr. Max. Thats a fad ſaying; ITED Bra fach a one becomes you well, Lacina. And yet methinks we ſhould not part fo ſlightly; | Our Loves have been of longer growth, more rooted Than the ſbarp blaſtof one Farewel can ſcarter. Kiſs me—I find no Ceſar here. Theſe Lips Taſtenot of Raviſher, 18 my opu110n.. Was it not ſo? Lucin. O yes. Max. 1 dare believe you. I know him and thy truth too well to doubt it. O' my moſt dear Lzcina | oh my Comfort ! Thou Blefling of my Youth * Life of my Life! #Ecius, Thave ſeen enough to ſtagger my Obedience. Hold me, ye equal Gods | thisis too finful, Mex. Why wert thou choſen out to make a Whore of, Thou only among millions of thy Sex ? Unfeignedly vertuous! fall, fall chryſtal Fountains, And ever fed your Streams, you riſing Sorrows, Tillyou have wept your Miſtreſs1nto marble. Now go forever from me. I xcin. Along farewel Sir! And as Fave been faithful, Gods, think on me: fEcizs. Madam farewel, fince you reſolve to die: Which well confiderd, _ If youcan ceafe a while from theſe ſtrange thoughts, E wilh wererather alter'd. Lucin. No. tEcius. Miſtake not. I would not ſtain-your Vertue for the Empire, Nor any way decline you to Diſhonour : It isnot my profeſſion, but a Villain's ; I find and feel your lols as deep as you do,
And ſtill am the fame Afc5u (till as h : The fame Life I have (ill & OE Es
one andy : Or  4ximns,
me vWord wear for you where Julticebid
la S me And tis no dull one. Therefore milconceive me not.
yy —_—
Cr We Ewe FTE ICICI CAC eG ce A AAS
V ALENTINIAN. 53
Only Id haveyou live a little longer. Lucir. AlasSir | why
Am I not wretched enough already ? | ZEcins. To draw from that wild man a ſweet repentance,
And goodnefs in his days to come. Max. They areſo. .
And will be ever coming, my ZEcixs. BE, | fEcins. For who knows but the fight of you, preſenting
His ſwoln ſinsat the full, and your wrong'd Vertue,
May like a fearful Viſion fright his Follies,
And once more bend him right again, which Blefling
If your dark Wrongs would give you leave toread,
Is more than Death, and the Reward moreglonous;z
Deathonly eaſes you. This the whole Empire
Beſides compell'd and forc'd by violence,
To what was done. The deed wasnone of yours;
For ſhould th? eternal Gods deſire to periſh,
Becauſe wedaily violate their Truth,
Which is the Chaſtity of Heavn? No Madam—  Luacin. The Tongues of Angels cannot alter me.
For could the World again reſtore my Honour.
As fair and abſolute asereIbred it, *' ' .
That World I ſhould not truſt ; again, the Emperor:
Can by my Life get nothing but my Story,
Which whilſt I breathe muft be his —_
And where you counſel me tolive, that Ceſar
May ſee his Errorsand repent 3 [le tell you,
His Penitence is but increaſe of Pleafure ;
His Pray*rs are never faid but to deceive us;
And when he weeps, {as you think, for his Vices)
'Tis bur as killing Drops from baleful Yew-trees,.
That rot his harmleſs Neighbours, ifhe can grieve
As one that yet defires his free Converſion,
Ple leave him Robes to mourn in—my fad Aſhes. Hcius. The Farewel then of happy Soulsbe with thee,
Andto thy Memory be ever ſung,
The Praiſes of a juft and conſtant Woman :
Thisfad day whilſt I ive, a Souldier's Tears
Ile offer on thy Monument.
Max. All that ischaſt upon thy Tomb ſball flouriſh 3
All |
:ying Epitaphs be thine 3 Times Story, ro what fe behind to piece our Lives, Shall be no more abus'd with Tales and Fritles.
* #icizs. But full of thee ſtand to Eternity, Once morefarewel —Gofind Eljzzumn, There where deſerving Souls are crown'd with Bleflings. Max. There where no vicious Tyrants come : Truth, Honour, Are keepers of that bleſt Place; go thither, : [ Ex.Lucina. FHcixe. Gods givethee Juſtice. . His Thoughts begin to work, I fear him yet; He ever wasa worthy Rozzaz, but I know not what to think on't. He has ſuffer'd Beyond a man, if he ſtand this. = Max. fEcins, Am alive, or has a dead Sleep feiz'd me? It was my Wifeth Emperor abusd thus, AndI muſt ſay—lam gladT had her for him. Muſt I not /Ecirs © #Ecins. T am ſtricken With ſuch a ſtiff Amazement, that no Anſwer Can readily come from me, nor no Comfort. Will you gohome, or go to my Houſe ? . Neither. , | I have no home, and you are mad Fficrxs, To keep me Company—-I ama Fellow My own Sword would forſake, not tyed tome. By Heav'nl daredo nothing. fEcius. You do better. . | Max. Iam madea branded Slave, ZEcius, Yet I muſtbleſs the Maker. : &D Death on my Soul? ſhall endure this tamely ? Muſt Maxizxs be mention'd for his Wrongs ? Iam a Child too ; whatdoldo railing ? I cannot mend my elf. "Twas Cefer did it. And what am [ to him? fEcins. "Tis well rememberd ; However you aretainted, be not Traitot. Max. O that thou wert not living, and my Friend ! FEcins. le bear a wary Eye upon your Actions : [ fear you, Maxims, nor can 1 blame you,
It
VALENTINIAN. 55
If you break out ; for by the Gods, yout Wrong Deſervesa general Ruine. Do you love me ? Max. That's all I have to live on. fEcins. Then go withme. You ſhall not to your own Houſe. Max. Nor to any. OW My Griefs are greater far than Walls can compaſsz And yet I wonderhow it happens with me. © I am not dang”rous, and in my Conſcience, Should I now fe the Emperor xth? heat ont, | I ſhould ſcarce blame him fort: anawe runs thro'-me, I feel it ſenſibly that binds meto it, | *Tisat my Heart now; thereit fits and rules, And methinks 'tis a pleaſure to obey it.. - fEcins. This is a Mask. to cozenme. 1 know you, . And how far you dare do. No Roman farther, - Nor with more fearleſs valour, and Ple watch you. Max. Is a Wifeslofs— . | More than the fading of a few freſh Colours? ZEcins. No more, Maximus, To one thattruly lives. ' _. | T Max. Why thenl care-not31 canlive well enough, Acixs <= For look you, Friend, for Vertue and thoſe Trifles, They may be bought they ſay. | #cins, He's craz'd a little. * His grief has made him talk things from ls nature. Will you go any ways? Max. Ple tell thee Friend, ET If my Wife for all this ſhould bea Whore now, 'Twou'd vex me, Rake LEE) For I amnot angry yet. I peror (#:51:65 We Is young and hte and the Woman Fleſh, | | And may not theſe two couple without Scraching > #Ecins. Alas, my Maximus! , 'F Max. Alasnot me,l amnot wretched, for there's no man miſcrable- But he that makes himſelf fo. : Og | | FEcins, Will you walk yet : ; Max.C _— me3ſhe = not die, Friend,that's the truth oft. 3c knowsthe enticing Sweets and Delicacres Ofa young Princes Pleaſure, and'1 thank. her, POL
— — — — — —— : : - <
CD C—_—
.DY off
Cu tn CO EIS —— rn I, ___ — — —
che has made way for Maximws to rife. Wilt not become me bravely ?
Hicizs, Deareſt Friend, Theſe wild words ſhew your violated mind, Urg'd with the laſt extremity of pricf ;
Which fince I cannot like a Man redreſs, With tears [ muſt lament it Bike a Child ; For when *tis Cefer doesthe injury, Sorrow is all the Remedy I know.
Max. Tisthen a certain truth that I am wrong'd, Wrong'd in that barb'rous manner [ imagin'd : Alas, I was in hopes Thad been mad,
And that theſe Horrors which invade my Heart, Were but diſtrafted melancholy Whimteys : But they are real truths (it ſeems) and I The laſt of men, and vileſt of all Beings. Bear mecold Earth, who am too weak to move Beneath my load of Shame and Miſery ! Wrong'd by my lawful Prince, robb'd of my Love, Branded with everlaſting infamy. - Take pity Fate, and give me leaveto die :
- Gods ! would you be ador'd forbeing good, Or only feard for proving miſchievous ? How would you have your Mercy underſtood ? Who could create a Wretch like Maximus, Ordain'd tho? guiltleſs to be infamous > Supream firſt Cauſes! you, whence all things flow, Whoſeinfiniteneſs does each little fill, - You, who decree each ſeeming Chance below, (Sogreat in Power) were you as good in Will, How could you ever have produc'd ſach ill 2 Had your eternal minds been bent to good ? Could humane happineſs have prov'd fo lame, Rapine, Revenge, [njuſtice, thirſt of Blood, Grief, Anguiſh, Horror, Want, Deſpair and Shame Had never found a Being nor a Name. ; 'Tis therefore leſs impiety to ſay, Evil witlr you has Coeternity, . Than blindly raking it the other way, That merciful and of eletion free,
17S; yy LG *#$5 a3 » #4 . $244 LY yo a * PEE: =+ _ 7 = X Proms mt 5 =” ERC (Ar " 1 8 > ww 7 '—"_ - s-: - 2 pros *ee. 4 5 «7 Kb ESY _ —_— at = id _ . 4 Pm *- wi 1m meer tt 32% YT was =; my TR" , Rags as - -- þ 4 os” [4 & 4 - - ns eg. RL 4 ”, | $86 Fil 0 Lb 1 [94 Fr TD. — 4x þ Semi «Ce
TP $ = : ” fatto ng ee ho
You
> 2S6C2 26 : hb  - T1 ? +4 wo "
— — — — SE NETERR_Re IE OS oermonn pr pores rn" ED I
VALENTINIAN
You did create the miſchiefs you foreſee. Wretch that I am, on Heavy to exclame When this poor tributary Worm below, More than my felf ia nothing but in name Who durſt invade me with this fatal Blow
I dare not cruſh in the revenge I owe. : Not all his Power ſhall the wild Monſter fave ;- Him and my ſhame Þle tread into one Grave. F: _ res ar but ſeem fo ?
r 15 he mad indeed ? Now to reprove hi Were council loſt ; but ſomething mult þ be _ With ſpeed and care, which may prevent that Fate Which threatens this unhappy Emperor.
Max. O Gods! my Heart, would it would faily break ; Methinks I am ſomewhat wilder than [ was, : And yet 1 thank the GodsI know my Duty.
J7
Exter Claudia.
Cland. Forgive me my ſad Tidings Sir——She's dead, Max. Why fo it ſhould be— [ He riſes] How? Claud. When firſt ſhe enterd ©
Into the Houſe, after a world of weeping,
And bluſhing like the Sun-fet -
Dare I, faid ſhe, defile my Husband?s Houſe,
Wherein his ſpotleſs Family has flouriſh ? I:
At this ſhe fell-— Choakt with a thouſand ſighs !
And now the pleas'd expiring Saint,
Her dying Looks, where new born Beauty ſhines,
Oppreſt with Bluſhes, modeſtly declin
While Death approacht with a Majeſtick Grace,
Proud to look Jovely once in fuch a Face :. T5
Her Arms ſpread to receive her welcome Guelt, _
With a glad figh ſhe drew into her Breaſt : |
Her Eyes then languiſhing tow'rds Heaven ſhe caſt,
To thank the Powers that Death was come at laſt.
And at the approach of the cold filent God 3
Ten thouſand hidden Glorics ruſh'd abroad. ERS Max. No more of this——Begon. Now my A»,
If thou wilt do we pleafure, weep a Jule 3 [
3 The TRAGEDY o
t 1 cannot—— Your Example
Lb tears to low —— Now lead away Friend, And as wewalk together ——L<et us pray, 3 may not fall from truth,
#cize. That's nobly ſpoken.
Max. Was I not wild, Acias ©
Ecizs. You were troubled. ;
Max. I felt no forrows then, but now my Griet, Like feſtering Wounds grown cold begins to ſmart, The raging Anguiſh gnaws and tears my Heart. Lead on and weep, but do not name the Woman.
| [Exeuzt.
The End of the fourth AT.
&A CFE V. SCENE I. #Ecins Solus, A letter.
Ficins. | OOK dowy, ye equal Gods, and guide my heart, | _, Or it will throw upon my hands an a& Which after Ages ſhall record with horror : As well may I kill my offended Friend, As think to puniſh my offending Prince. The Laws of Friendſhip we our ſelves create, And 'tis but fimple Villany to break 'em ; But Faith to Princes broke, is Sacriledge, An injury to the Gods, And that loſt Wretch Whoſe Breaſt is poyſon'd with ſo vile a Purpoſe, Tears Thunder down from-Heav'n on his own head, And leaves a Curſe to his Poſterity : Judge him your ſelves, ye mighty Gods, who know y you permit ſometimes that Honour bleed; That Faith be broke, and Innocence oppreſt.
_
—
SET eden Ids, PW 2 om, 6 ARNIE TOS or... hm —
|
—-
Dat-A 1 TE SAS: DATION 2
\
> —— ——
* VALENTINIAN.
My Duty's my Religion, and howe're
The great Account may riſe 'twixt him and you, Through all his Crimes I ſee your Image on bim, And muſt prote& it no way then but this, | To draw far off the injur'd Maximus, And keep him there faſt Priſoner to my Friendſhips Revenge ſhall thus be flatter'd or deſtroy'd,
And my bad Maſter whom t bluſh to ſerve,
Shall by my means at leaſt be ſafe. This Letter Informs him I am gone to Xgypt, there
T ſhall live ſecure and innocent 3:
His fins ſball ne're oretake me, nor his fears,
59
Enter Proculus.
Here comes one for my Purpoſe, Proculss ; Well met, I have a Courtele to ask of you.
Proc. Of me, my Lord ! Is there a Houſe on fire ? Or is there ſome knotty Point now in debate Betwixt your Lordſhip and the Scavengers ? For you have ſuch a popular, and oblick Spirit,
As in dull times of Peace will not diſdain The meaneſt opportunity to ſerve your Country. |
#Ecivs. You witty Fools are aptto get your Heads broke : This is no feafon for Buffooning Sirrah ; ; Though heretofore I tamely have endur'd Before th' Emperour your ridiculous Mirth,
Think not you have a Title to be ſawcy 3
When Monkey's grow miſchievous, they are whipt, Chain'd up and whipt. There has been miſchief done, And you (I hear) a wretched Inſtrument -
Look to't, when e're I draw this Sword to-punilh, You and your grinning Crew will tremble, Slaves; _ Nor ſhall the ruin'd world afford a Corner | To ſhelter you, nor that poor Princes Boſom,
You have invenom'd and polluted fo;
As if the Gods were willing it ſhould be :
A Dungeon for fuch Toads to craw] and croak 1N. -.
Proc. All this in earneſt to your humbleſt Creature? Nay, then my Lord, 1 muſt no _— pretend _
v o —
, Fo ; mor Ex: U on oy _ . c 4 £4 . - b : bs i nao * at ad »v 4 ww .- Sandor ns , "= $203 $ bs j « ” wu b- — ns . he I Cranes — G—_—6 - RR > on Xe S 4 4 4 or YT OE er ern, IT bs Ss _ "Y PEI AR lah va! i
Ny & > S3 LI8 4 ” WT | Ren merge? T0: bb #577 4 b a>
NO TIES
Emer Fs $ #| 1.2 Ment crogher PY 2 = ib _ 4
ich m r Talent to divert your Ears; Sine nt Tall avcakng Mirth is grown offenhive. Tho' Heay'n can tell, - There's not ſo low an A& of ſervile Duty, I wou'd not with more Pride throw my (elf on, For great Aciaz's fake, than gain a Province, Or ſhare with /'alentiziaz in his Empire.
#cins. Thou art fo fawning and fo mean a Villain, That I diſdain to hate, tho' I defpiſe thee 3 When e're thou art not fearful, thou art ſawcy 3 Be ſo again, my Pardon gives thee leave, And todeſerve tt, carry this my Letter To the Emperor : Tell him I am gone for /Egypr, And with me, Maximws; *twas icarce fit we two Should take our leaves of him : Pray uſe your Intereſt He may forgive us. ? [will concern you much, For when we are gone, to be baſe vicious Villains,
Will prove lef dang'rous [Exit Acius.
Proc. What the Devil pollcfles This ruſty Back and Breaſt without a Head-Piece ? Villains and Vicious ! Maximns and Egypt ! This may be Treaſon, or Tle make it ſo : | The Emperor's apt enough to fears and jealoufics 3 Since his late Rape. I muſt blow up the fire, And aggravate this doating Hero's Notions, Til they ſuch Terrors in the Prince have bred, May coſt the Fool his worſt part, that's his Head.
SCENE IL
Enter Emperour, Lycinius, Chylax, and Balbns.
Emp. Dead? Balb. "Tis too certain, Emp. How? _
ſid ing rey - Wis wy p hip Tr + 7 65.1 TAPS v:25h #-4 [+ iO $3 a+
-- 41 +: Saas OY OY 4 OE rnd
” W's 5 +6 $444 -'@@ 6 uty $0 TS Et xt 4;
Lycin. Grief and Diſpra As people lay. "I ſe zip. No more, I have too much on't,
Too much by you. You whetters of ies ; - Ye Angel: formers of my ins 3 but Devit, FRO
_ A mee
rt => Mr A —— —— —— —— ” Oak = - — =D ——=_ Cs - _ %
VALENTINIAN. %«
Where is your cunning now:2 you--would wor There was no Chaſtiey above _ practices Ns 20 - eqn wes make her love her Wrongs, nd coat upon her Rape. - Ma - TT ec EO Chy. Alas Sir! ES Fs Ws _.-: Emp. Hang you Raſcals. as Ye blaſters of my Youth, if ſhe be gone, Twere better ye had been your Fathers Camels, Groan'd under weights of Wooll and Water. Am I not Ceſar 2 | Lycir. Mighty, and onr Maker Emp. Then thus have given my Pleaſures to deſtruction—— Look ſhe be living, Slaves | Chy. We are no Gods, Sir, - If ſhe be dead, to make her live:again. .- Emp. She cannot dye, ſhe muſt not dye: are thoſe I plant my Love upon but common livers? | Their Hours told out to *em ? Can they be Aſhes? Why do you flatter a belief in-me, © - - -:, [-: -+ That I amall that 82 The World my Creatuzxes. \. _ - - The Trees bring forth their Fruit, - when 1-ſay.Summer 3 The Wind that knows no limits but its wildnelſs, At my command moves not a Leaf: The Sea, - With his proud mountain-Watersenvying Heav'n, When I fay ſtill, runs into chryſtal Mirrors. _ -- Can I do this and ſhe dye? Why yeBubbles, .. | That with my leaſt breath break, no more remember'd, Ye Moths that fly about my Flames and periſhz. . Why do ye make me God, that can do nothing 2. Is ſhe not dead ? 52 6 | Chy. All Women are not dead with her. _ Emp. A common Whore ſerves you, and far above you, The Pleaſures of a Body lam'd with lewdnefs,
Am I a man to traffick with Liſeaſes? =.
You think, becauſe ye have bred me up to Pleafures, And-almoſt run me over all the rare ones,
Your Wives will ſerve the turn; I care not for 'em,
Your Wives are Fencers Whores, and ſhall be Footmens, Tho
=
n 4 t65 19m ® - "II ———_— = _ F oe , = LI 5: © 3 Bt T IS PTL! (a T1 1-0 Ea T— OSraoy G 9 roy __ 4.25" bb nds b " + aP>get = IE th} <4 * 5 - hs = _ _— <p ;! <4" bg [: ww? 4-0 2+ 544 5b4+-3k TD, Favs . 2h y + i445 Mis, - 2/3. v = . a =: 66 - - oh wb : . £ hb edn = _ "I Pg = _ =_ ——_— —. A - —_ -- —_ —_—
oymo_—_— 7 ., od ama a So.
EY ny . "4 mnt; en "mn -: trade 1 A E "THY: 5 p bas v4 wei bas hob, am un tr 196 a we —- o* &
a. Tr TRAGEDY of
Tho? ſometimes my Fantaſtick Luſt or Scorn, Has made you Cuckolds for variety 3 I wou'd not have ye hope or dream, ye poor ones, Always ſo great a Bleſſing from me. Go, _ Get your own [nfamy hereafter Raſcalsz ye enjoy Each one an Heir, the Royal Seed of Ceſar, And I may curſe ye for it. Thou Lycinius, Haſt ſuch a Mafeline, fuch a Lais, ; The Backs of Bulls cannot content, nor Stallions, The ſweat of fifty men anight does nothing. Lycin. T hope Sir, you know better things of her. Emp. *Tis Oracle, The City can bear witneſs, thine's a Fool, Chylax, Yet ſhe can tell her twenty, and all Lovers, All have lain with her too3 :and.-all as ſhe is, Rotten and ready for an Hofpital: Yours is a holy Whore, friend Balbuc. Balb, Wall Sir. * : Exp. One that can pray away the Sins ſhe ſuffers But not the Puniſhment 3 ſhe has had ten Baſtards, -Five of *em now are Liftors, yet ſhe prays. RI She has been the Song of Rowe and common Paſquil, Since I durſt fee a Wench, - ſhe was Camp-Mifſtreſs, And muſter'd all the Cohorts,-paid *em too, They have it yet to ſhew, and:yet ſhe prays. Sheis now to enter old-Men turn'd'Children, That have forgot their Rudiments 3' and am 1 Left for theſe wither'd Vices > And was there but one, But one of all the World that conld content me, And ſnatcht away in ſhewing? if your Wives Be not yet Witches, or your ſelyes? now be ſo, And ave your Lives; raiſe me the deareſt Beauty, As whenl forc'd her full of Chaſtity, Or by the Gods | -»Lycin. Moſt facred Ceſar , Slaves.
—
Enter Prom 7
Proc. Hail Ceſar, Tidings of Concern and Danver- My Meffage does contain 4 furious manner, Ws With Oaths and Threatnings, ſtern ZEcius, PAO Enjoynd me on the peril of my life, *- EE 7 hier To give this Letter into Cefars hands,
Arm at all points, prepar'd to march he ſtands, With crowds of mutinous Officers abopt him, Among theſe, full of Anguiſh and Defpair,
Like pale Tyſiphore along Hell-brinks,
Plotting Revenge and Ruine—— Maxinms
With Ominous aſpes walks in filent horror,
In threatning Murmurs and harſh broken ſpeeches, - They talk of Egypt and their Provinces,
Of Cohorts ready with their lives to ſerve *em,
And then with bitter Curſes they nam'd you. |
Emp. Go tell thy fears to thy Compamions, Slave! For *tis a Language Princes underſtand not 3 Be gone, and leave me to my felf. [Ex. af but Emperor. "The names of ZFciav and of Myximmr, |
Run thro? me hike a Fever;ſhake and burn me ;- But*to my Slaves I muſt not ſhew my poorneſs. They know me vicious, ſhow'd they find me baſe, How would the Villains ſcorn me and infult ?-
Letter. He reads.
Sir, W_ Would ſome God inſpire me iwith another way to ſerve you, T would not thus fly from you without leave; but Maximus his wrongs have toucht too many, and ſhould ZE His preſence here incourage em, dangers to you wi, bt follow ry Is Xgypt he will be more forgot, and you more fafe by his Abſence. | |
Emp. A Plot, by Heav'n! a Plot laid for my Life, This is too ſubtle for my dull friend /Ecins 5 © * Heay'n give you Sir, a better ſervant to guard you;
RP — — —— ——— _ —
64 The TRAGEDY f A faithfuller you will never find than HEcins,
Since he reſents his Friends Wrongs, he'l revenge 'em 3 I know the Souldiers love him more than Heav'n,
Me they hate more than Peace what this may breed If dull ſecurity and confidence
Let him grow up, a Fool may find and laugh at.
Who wats there 2 Proculns.
Enter Proculus. |
Well, haſt thou obſerv'd |
The growing powr and pride of this /Eczus?
He writes to me with terms of Inſolence,
And ſhortly will rebel, if ot prevented 3
But in my baſe lewd Herd of vicious Slaves,
There's not a man that dares ſtand up to ſtrike
At my Command, and kill this rifiag-Trattor. | Proc. The Gods forbid Cefar ſhould thus be ſerv'd,
The Earth will ſwallow him,-did: you command it !
But I have ſtudy'd a ſafe ſure way, +
How he {ball dye and your will ne're fuſpefted. .
A Souldiers waits without, . whom he has wrong'd,
Which in your name Tle give him inſtantly, Will make him fly more wy on the Murther, rſt appointment.
Pre. Ay, there yhave found the point Sir, If he can be fo beurith to believe it. :
Emp. Oh never fear! urge it with Confidence. What will not fluter'd angry fools believe ? Minutes are precious, looſe not one.
Proc. 1 fly Sir
[Exit Proculus.
Emp.
CU
— _____W_
=r " _ Oo _—
Ewp. What an infeted Conſcience do I live with : And what a Beaſt I'me grown 2 when Luſt has gaind An uncontrouF'd Dominion in mans Heart ! Then fears ſucceed with horror and amazement, -
Which rack the wretchand tyrannize b tu But hold g hg
Shall I grow then ſo poor as to repent ? | Tho? /fcins, Mankind, and the Gods forfake me, Ile never alter and forſake my ſelf.
CanT forget the Jaſt diſcourſe he held >
As if he had intent to make me odious
To my own face, and by a way of terror,
What Vices I was grounded in, and almoſt Proclaim'd the Souldiers hate againſt me. Is not The ſacred Name and Dignity of Ceſar >
Were this /Ecizs more than man ſufficient
To fhake off all his Honeſty > He is dangerous,
Tho' he be good, and tho' a Friend, a- fear'd one, And ſuch I muſt not ſleep by ; as for Maximus,
Ple find a time when /Eczxs is diſpatcht.
I do believe this Proculzs, and I thank him ; i "Twas time to look about z if I muſt periſh,
Yet ſhall my fears go formoſt, that's determin'd.
[Exit Emperonr. SCENE 111. Emter Proculus and Pontius. Proc. Befides this, if you do it, you enjoy
The noble name of Patriciaz, more. than that too z The Friend of Ceſar yare ſtiPd. Theres nothing
Within the hopes of Roxe, or preſent being,
But you may ſafely ſay is yours.
Pont. Pray ſtay Sir. What has Zcins done to be deſtroy'd ? At leaſt T would have a Colour.
Proc. You have more. : Nay, all that can be given 3 hes a Traitor.
One, any man would ſtrike that wu a Subject. Pont
rn er rrrnrnnnntntn— en nn —
CI I ee Inn > ———
66 The TRAGEDY off
Pont. Is he fo foul ? : Proc. Yes, a moſt fearful Traitor. Pont. A fearful Plague upon thee, for thou lyſt; [ Afide.
I ever thought the Souldiers would undo him,
With their too much Aﬀettion.
Proc. You have 1t. They have brought him to Ambition, Pont. Thea he 1s gone. "RY ' Proc. The Emperour, out ofa fooliſh Pity, Would fave him yet. Port, Is he fo mad ? ' Proc. He's madder,
Would go to tArmy to him. | Pont. Would be fo ? Proc. Yes Pontius, but we conſider. Pont, Wiſcly. | | Proc. How elfe man, that the State lies in it ? | Pont. And your Lives?
Proc. And every mans. Pont. He did me _ [Aretus here.
All the diſgrace he could. . "I Proc. And ſcurvily. ' Pizt. Out of a Miſchief meerly. Did you mark it ?
P7oc. Yes, well enough. Now you have means to quit it 5 The Deed done, take his Place. Port. Pray iet me think on't,
'Fis tef1 to oneI doit _
Proc. Do, and be happy _ [ Exit Proculus. Pont. This Emperor 1s made of nought but miſchief;
Sure Murther was his Mother. None to lop
But the main Link he had ? Upon my Conſci-nce,
The man is truly honeſt, and that kills him.
For to live here, and ſtudy to be true,
Is all one as to be a Traitor. Why ſhould he dye ?
Have they not Slaves and Raſcals for their Offerings
In full avoundance, Bawds, more than Beaſts for ſlaughter p
Have they not ſinging Whores enough, an: Knaves beſides,
And millions of ſuch Martyrs to fink Charos,
But the beſt Sons of Rowe muſt fall roo > 1 will ſhew him
(Since
-
—ﬆRU6 —_— —_————
PO VALENTINIAN mce ne m Je) a way ts do j z And tho' he bears me hard! yet ſhall ro 2 I'm born to. make him bleſs me for a Blow. 22 [Exz.
SCENE TIy. Ezter Phidius, Aretus, and Xcius.
Aret. The Treaſon is too certain : | L_ _ Villain Procalus inſtru 9 08 Lad. e d:ſperate Pontius to difj Here 1n the Anti-Chamber, Fane you here Y Phid. LY . et you may eſcape to the Camp, wel hazard wi | Fe _ _— not your Life fo baſety Sir 5 anon nd many when they ſee your S : Muſt Ellow Your Adv "are, al Rn0we Os FEcins. Ger ye from me. Is ni»: "e i2oom of Ceſar on this Body ? / D- . 9t bear my laſt hour here now ſent me? f. 3 nor old /Ecixs ever dying ? , : uu thiik this Tenderneſs and Love you bring me 5 'Tis Treaſon and the ſtrength of Diſobedience 3 And it ye tempt me further ye ſhall feel it. I feek the Camp for ſafety, when my Death, Tea times more glorious then my Life and laſting, Bids me be happy. Let Fools fear to dye, Cr he that weds a Woman for his Honour, Dreaming no other Life to come but Kiſſes. fEcins is not now to learn to ſuffer ; It ye dare ſhew a juſt affeftion, kill me, I ſtay but thoſe that muſt 3 why do ye weep ? Am I fo wretched as to deſerve mens Pities ? Go, give your Tears to thoſe that loſe their worths, Bewail their miſeries : For me, wear Gar : Drink Wine, and much. Sing Peavs to my Praiſe, I am to triumph, Friends, and more than Ceſar, For Ceſar fears to dye, I love to dye. Phid. O my dear Lord!
K 2 | Hd
8 ee ons don — | VENEER _
68 The TRAGEDY off
Zcins, No more, go, gol ay, Shew me not figns of forrow, I deferve none. Dare any man lament [ ſhould dye nobly ? When I am dead, ſpeak honourably of me 3 That is, preſerve my Memory from dying, There if you necds muſt weep your rund Maſter, A Tear or two will ſeem well ; Fhis I charge you, (Becauſe ye ſay ye yet love old /Ecins.) See my poor Body burnt, and ſome to ſing About my Pile what I have done and ſuffer. If Cefer kill not that too: At your Banquets, When I am gone, if any chance to number The times that have been fad and dangerous; _ Say how [ fel], and *tis ſufficient. No more ſay ; he that laments my end, By all the Gods, diſhonours me 3 be gone, And ſuddenly and wiſely from my Dangers, My Death is catching elle.
Ph:d. We fear not dying.
FEcins. Yet fear a wilful Death, the juſt Gods hate it, L need no Corhpany to that, that Children Daredo alone, and Slaves are proud to purchaſe, Live till your honeſtics, as mine has done, Make this corrupted Ape fick of your. Virtues, Then dye a Sacrifice, and then you'l know The noble ufe of dying well and Romars.
Aret. And muſt we leave you Sir ?
fEcins. We muſt all dye, All leave our ſelves, it matters not where, when Nor how, fo we dye well. And can that man that does fo, Need Lamentation for him? Children weep Becauſe they have offended, or for fear ; Women for want of Will and Anger; is there In noble man, that truly feels both Poyles Of Life and Death, fo much of this weakneſs, To drown a glorious Death in Child and Woman > I am aſham'd to ſee you,_yet you move me, And were it not my Manhood would accuſe me,
For covetous to live, I ſhould weep with 70U Phd. O we ſhall never ſec you [Dar ,
- — c— — X A cm
FEcins,
=
——O—
y > mn onng - — — - —_ _ - ; : - ———_— "CT III _ < — - ISS Eo Fas GT IIs — —_— 4 mip ff
VALENTINIAN . * 6g fEcinzs. Tis true. | Nor I the Miſeries that Roxee ſhall ſafer, Which is a Benefit Life cannot reckon; But what I have been, which is juſt and faithful 5 One that grew old for Rome, when Rome forgot-him, And for he was an honeſt man durſt dye. Ye ſhall have daily with you, could that dye too. . you, ye too; And I return no Traffick of my Travels, : No Annals of old Xcizs, but he lived. | « My Friends, ye had cauſe to weep, and bitterly ;, - The common overflows of tender Women And Children new born ; Crying were too little To ſhew me then moſt wretched ; if Tears muſt be, - I ſhould in juſtice weep 'em, and for you ; You are to hve, and yet behold thoſe Slaughters, The dry and wither'd bones of Death would bleed at. But ſooner than I have time to think what muſt be, I fear youl find what ſhall be. If you love me, | Let that word ſerve for all. Be gone, and leave me z I have fome little praftice with my Soul, And then the ſharpeſt Sword is welcomeſt —— Go, Pray be gone. Yehave obey'd me living, Be not for ſhame now ſtubborn——So-—1 thank ye And fare you well—— A better Fortune guide ye. BY Phid. What ſhall we do to ſave our beſt lovd Maſter? [ Afde. . Aret. Vie to Aﬀranizs, who with half a Legion Lies in the old Sbbura, all will riſe For the brave /Ecivs. Phid. Tle to Maximmws, ; And lead him hither to peovent th 62" 2 "ne evenge, which Ile make lure © | Or hey WO Eng [Exit Phidius ad Aretus. 7E:3u5. 1 bear 'em come, who ſtrikes firſt? I ſtay for you. -
Enter Balbus, Chylax, Lycinius. .
Yet willl dye a Souldier, my Sword drawn, | ; But againſt none. Why do you fear > Come forward.
Bath. You were a Souldier Chylax. Gs;
Chy. Yes, I muſter'd, But never ſaw the Enemy. Lycin. He's arm'd.
_____ By Heav'n I dare not do it.
cixs. Why do you tremble > —--
I am to dye. Comeye not from Ceſar To that end ? ſpeak.
Balb. We do, and we muſt kill you. "Tis Cefars Will. _ Chy. 1 charge you put your Sword up, That we may do it handſomly.
#Ecins, Ha, ha, ha ! My Sword up ! handſomely! where were you bred ? You are the merrieſt Murtherers, my Maſters, I ever met withal. Come forward, Fools. Why do you ſtare? Upon my Honour,Bawds, I will not ftrike you.
Lyciz. Yle not be firſt.
Balb, Nor I.
Chy. You had beſt dye quietly. The Emperor Sees how you bear your {ef
#Ecins. 1 would dye, Raſcals, If you would kill me quietly.
Balb, Plague on Procnlns, He promus'd to bring a Captain hither, That has been vsd to kill.
fEcizs. Te call the Guard, Uuleſs you kill me quickly, and proclaim What beaſtly, baſe, cowardly Companions The Emperor has truſted with his ſafery ; Nay, Ile give out you fell on my fide, Villains; Strike home you bawdy Slaves.
Chy. He will kill us, I markt his hand, he waits but time to reach us ;
nee net . A —
fEcins. lf you do mangle me, EE S Fg 2s And kill me not at two blows, or at three,
Or not ſo, ſtagger me, my Senſes fail me, Look to your ſelves.
Chy. I told ye. | fcias.
> \
CA a ia eee won.
VALENTINIAN
Andes « doen Retks _ &
nd take a thouſand firoaks, -
Balb. Here's Pontins. nalfhgk Portis. Port. Not kill him yet > = D
Is this the Love you bear the Em peror? - : .. 4.5,
_ Nay, then I ſee you are Traitors all 53 haveat ye.” © - D OY
Balb. And I am killd— - - 7 Se Pont. Dye Bawds, w= Chylax avg Balbus..
As you have liv'd _ Aouriſhe.” BS MAcins. Wretched Fellow,
What haſt thou done ? 494 WE: d i! 4 Port. KilPd them that durſt not kill. | ts = x
And you are next. : = W- |
Acius. Art thou not Pontins ® © bent -= 45 And in the face of all the Camp difgracd. .: Eu Cn
Xcins. Then ſo much nobler, as thou art a Soldier...
Shall my death be. Is it revenge provokt thee?- 7
Or art thou hired to kill me?. = P ont. Both. EEE | ? bs #FEcins. Then do it. . : Port. Is that all 2. | | | HEcins. Yes. © Pont. Would. you not live ? TE = = AEcins. Why ſhould I? | Fin 07S : |
To thank thee for my Life? - Fo foe ntes WO © = Pont. Yes, if I ſpare it. were 65.24 HEcins. Be not deceiv'd, I was not made to chank E
For any Courtefie bur killing me, | 5
A fellow of thy Fortune. Do thy Duty. | | Port, Do you not fear me? 73 TV EF | = | ; Acins. No. | EETLS nk IJ | Pont. Nor love me for it ? | Er | |
Ecins. Thar's as thou doſt thy Buſineſs. . -" [} | |
Port. Tam the ſame you caſt, cine, - 07: t538K; | | |
wy bs.
.* = 0 FUR ATTN = — — _ ——— . $_—_ ———_——— = 99———  — = 0 |
ou are dead, your Place is mine, Ficiue.:
Keetor: Now [| fear thee, And not alone thee, Portins, but the Emprre.
Pont. Why 2 I can aps Sit.
a —— - —_— —— — — — —
I MRLY ” _ = ——  — — En = TC  — —_— — — - vo
#cins, 1 would thou coul'd(t, And firſt thy ſelf : Thou canſt fight well and bravely, Thou can'ſt endure all Dangers, Heats, Colds, Hungers ; Heav'ns angry Flaſhes are not ſuddener, Then I have ſeen thee execute, nor more mortal, The winged feet of flying Enemies, I have ſtood and ſeen thee mow away like Ruſhes. And ſtill kill the Killer ; were thy mind But half ſs ſweet in Peace as rough in Dangers, I dy'd to leave a happy Heir behind me. Come ſtrike and be a General — —- Port. Prepare then, And for I fee your honour cannot leſſen, And 'twere a ſhame for me to ſtrike a dead man, Fight your ſhort ſpan out. #Ecivus, No. Thou know'ſ{t I muſt not ; I dare net give thee ſuch advantage of me As Difobedience. Port. Dare you not defend you Againſt your Enemy ? | Mcins, Not ſent from Ceſar ? [ have no power to make ſuch Enemies, For as I am condemn'd, my naked Sword Stands but a Hatchment by me, only held To ſhew I was a Souldier 3 had not Ceſar Chain'd all defence in this Doom. Let him dye, Old as Iam, and quench'd with Scars and Sorrows, Yet would I make this witherd Arm do wonders, And open in an Enemy ſuch wounds, Mercy would weep to look on. Port. Then have at you, And look upon me, and be ſure you fear not, Remember who you are, and why you live, And what I have been to you: Cry not hold, Nor think it baſe injuſtice I ſhould kill thee. fEciac. | am prepar'd for all. Pont. For now /Erivs, Thou ſhalt behold and find I was no Traitor, [ Pontius &z's And as I do it, bleſs me - Dycas I do _— Biff.
£O.fe8;
- Y ALENTINIAN
cz#5. Lhou haſt deceiv'd ontins. TY
By all my Hopes in Heav'n Sherk Kenan: ng Pozt. To ſhew you what you ought to do this 1 "a
Bur noble Sir, you have been jealous of agg
And held mein the Rank of ==
And I muſt dying fay it was but Jaſtice Fs,
You caſt me from my Credit, Yer believe
For there is nothing now but truth to fave =
And your forgiveneſs, tho? you hold me he; .
And of a troubled Spirit that like fire |
Furns all to flames it meets with : You miſtook :
If I were Foe to any thing, 'twas cafe, EY
Want of the Souldiers due. —The Enemy.
The nakedneſs we found at home, and ſcorn
Children of Peace and pleaſures, no regard
Nor comfort for our Scars, nor how we got *em
To ruſty time that eats our Bodies up, 6
Made us their Saints, but now the Sores of Rome Toſflken Flattery, and Pride plain'd over, Forgetting with what Wind their Fathers ſaild, | } And under whoſe proteQon their ſoft pleaſures | - Grow full and numberleſs. To this I am Foe, "$6.E == Not to the State or any point of Duty; | | ' And let me ſpeak but what a Souldier may, - | Truly I ought to be ſo, yet I errd, | Becauſe a far more noble Sufferer, FOel oy | Shew'd me the way to Patience, and I left it 3 | It] This is the end I dye for, to live baſely, \ , And not the follower of him that bred me, | | I In full account and Virtue, Poztizs dares not, ” = Much leſs to out-live all that is good, and flatter. | ZAcins. 1 want a Name to give thy Virtue, Souldier, | For only good is far below thee, Poxtius, lj The Gods ſhall find thee one: Thouhalt faſhion'd Death | | In fach an excellent and beauteous manner, | [ 7 I wonder men can live! Canſt thou ſpeak one word more? ; |
For thy words are ſuch + o6 a Soul Would
k PO
74 The TRAGEDY of
Would chuſe to fly to Heav'n n. Pont. A farewell, F Good noble General your hand: Forgive me, And think whatever was dilplealing to you, Was none of mine, you cannot live. Xcins. I will not, Yet one word more. Pont. Dye nobly, Roe farewel, And Valemtinian fall. In joy you have given me a quiet Death, Ewould ſtrike more Wounds 1f I had more Breath [ Dies Zcins. Ts there an hour of goodneſs beyond this ? Or any man that would outlive fuch Dying ? Would Cz2far double all my Honours on me, And ſtick me ore with Favours like a Miſtreſs ; Yer would I grow to this man :. I have Loy'd, But never doated on a Face tiff now. Oh Death! Thou art morethan Beauty, and thy Pleafures Beyond Poſterity: :* Come Friends and kill me. Cefar be kind and ſend a thouſand Swords, 54 The more the greater is my fall: why ſtay you? Comeand Ple kiſs your-Weapons : fear me not ; By all the Gods Ple honour ye-for killing :- Appear, or through the Court and World Fle ſearch ye, He follow ye, and erelidie preclaim ye The Weeds of Italy ; thedrofs of Nature, Where are ye Villains, Traitors, Slaves — * [Exit.
SCENE Y. Valentinian and he Eunuch diſcover'd on a C ak
Ep. Oh let meprefs theſe balmy Lipsall day, And bathe my Love-fcorch'd Soul in thy moiſt Kiſſes: Now by my Joys thou art all ſweet and foft,
And thou ſhakt be the Altar of my Love,
Upon thy Beauties hourly will I offer,
And pour out Pleaſure and: bleſt Sacrifice, Fothedear memory of my Lacina,
No
_ VALETINFAN No God, nor Goddek ever was ador'd'. With ſuch Religion, as my Lovefhall be. -
For in theſe charming Raptures of my Soul,
Claſpt inthy Arms, le waſte my ſelf aws And rob the ruin'd World of their preatL ord, Whule to the Honour of Lacize's Name; i: _ | I leave Mankind to mourn the lob far ever.
A SONG.
T. Indneſs bath reſeftleſs Charms, ALL beſides can weakly move 5 Fierreft Anger it diſarm, © Ard clips the wings of flyins Love.
ER PS, Beauty does the heart invade, Kindneſs only cax perjwade
it guilds the Lovers ſeraile-chain, | OE =
And makes the Slave grow pleas d and vain. - Emter Eciuswith two Swords.
Emp. Ha! | What deſperate Mad-man weary of hisBeing, . © Preſumes to preſs upon my happy Moments? --- FEcins? And arm'd 2 Whence comes thisimpions BoldneG? Did not my Will, the Worlds moft facred Law, | Doom thee to die? : And dar'ſt thou in Rebellion be alive?- = Is Death more frightfut grown than Diſobedience? - - #Ecizs. Not for a hated Life condemn'd by you, ' Which in your Service has been (till exposd To Pain and Labours, Famine, Slaughter, Fire, And all the dreadful Toyls of horrid War! Am I thus lowly laid before your feet? For what mean Wretch, who hashis Duty done, Would care to live, when you declare him worthleſs?
If I muſt fall, which your fevere Disfavour Uath
92
Det , =
——— —————
6 The TRAGEDY of
Hath made theeafier and'thenobler Choice, Yield me not up a wretched Sacnfice Tothe poor Spleen of a baſe Favourite. Let not vile Inſtruments deſtroy the man. _ Whom once you loy?d : but let your hand beſtow That welcome Death your anger has decreed. [ Lays his Sword at his feet. Emp. Go, ſeek the common Executioner Old man, thro? vanity and'years grown mad, Or to reprieve thee from the Hangman ſtroak, Go, uſe thy militaryIntereſt To beg a milder Death among the Guards, And tempt my kindI'd Wrath no more with folly. Fcixs. WW-counſelld thanklefs Prince, you did indeed Beſtow that Office on a Souldier:; But in the Army could you hope to find With all your Bribes a Murderer of /Ecizs ? Whom they fo long have follow'd, known and own'd Their God in War? and thy good Genius ever! Speechleſs and cold without,upon the Ground The Souldier lyes, whoſe generous Death will teach. Pofterity. true Gratitude and Honour. And preſsas heavily upon thy Soul, Loſt Valentinian, as thy barb*rous Rape. For which fince Heav'n alone muſt puniſh thee, Hedo Heav'ns juſtice on thy baſe Aftiſter.  [Ravs at Lycias. Lycias. Save me, my Lord. Ezp. Hold honeſt /Ecixs, hold. Iwastooraſh. Oh ſpare the gentle Boy | AndPle forgive thee all. Lyzcias. Furies and Death. : [ Dies. Emp. He bleeds! mourn ye Inhabitants of Heavn ! For ſure my lovely Boy was one of you |! But he is dead, and now ye may rejoyce, For ye have ftol'n him from me, ſpiteful Powers ! Empire and Life I ever have deſpi'd, The vanity of Pride, of Hope and Fear, In Lovealone my Soul found real Joys ! And {till zetyrannize and croſs my Love. Oh that I had a Sword, [ Throws hins a Sword.
To
VALENTINIAN. -» To drive this raving Foo] headlong to Hell. [ Fight fEcins. Take your defire, and try if lawleſs Luſt - Can ſtand againſt Truth, Honeſty and Juſtice! I have my Wiſt. Gods/Giveyoutrue Repentance, And bleſs you ſtill : beware of Maxime. [ They fight. Acius runs on the Emp. Sword, and falls. Dies. Emp. Farewel dull Honeſty, which tho deſpisd, © Canſt makethy owner run on certainRuine. Old /Ecizs / Where is now thy NameinWar? Thy Intereſt with ſo many conquer'd Nations? - The SouldiersReverence, andthe Peoples Love? - Thy mighty Fame and Popularity ? With which thou kept'ſt me ſtill incertain fear, . Depending on thee for uncertain fafery : Ah what a lamentable Wretchis he, . Who urg'd by Fear or Sloth, yieldsup his pow'r To hope protection from his-Favourite ? Wallowing 1m Eaſe and Vice ? feels no Contempt, But wears theempty Name of Prince with ſcorn ? And lives a poor lead Pageant to his Slave ? Such have I been to thee, honeſt AEcias ! Thy pow'r kept me in awe, thy pride 1m pain, Till now Llivd; but fince tart dead, He reign.
Exter Phidiuswith Maximus.
Phid. Behold my Lord the cruel Emperor, By whoſe tyrannick Doom the noble Ec: - Was judg'd to die.
Emp. He was ſo, ſawcy Slave!
Struck by this hand, here grovelingat my feet *
The Traitor lyes ! as thou ſhalt do bold Villain !
Go to the Furies, carry my Defiance, [Kills bine.
And tell *em, Cefar fears nor Earthnor Hell. : Phia. Stay Micima, and Te wait thy mightier Ghoſt.
Oh Maxime, thro' the long vault of Death,
I hear thy Wife cry out, revenge me!
Revenge me on the Raviſher! no more
p Dies of Aretus comes to aid thee ! oh farewel! [
Ep. Ha ! what not ſpeak yet?thou whoſe wrongs are yours |
Gt nn —
3 The TRAGEDY of .Or do the Horrors that we have been doing, Amaze thy feeble Soul? It thouart a Romer, Anſwer the Emperor: Ceſar bids thee ſpeak.
Max. A Roman ? Ha | And Cefar bids thee ſpeak? Pronounce thy Wrongs, and tell 'emore in Groans 3 But oh theStory is inefftable! Cefar's Commands, back'd with the Eloquence Of all the inſpiring Gods, cannot declare it. Oh Emperor, thou Piture of aGlory ! Thou mangled Figure of aruin'd Greatneſs! Speak, faiſt thou ? Speak the Wrongs of Maxims. Yes, I will ſpeak. Imperial Murderer! Raviſher ! Oh thou royal Villany! In Purple dipt to give a Gloſs to Miſchief. Yetere thy Death inriches my Revenge, And ſwells the Book of Fate, you ſtatelier Mad-man, Plac'd by the Gods upon a Precipice, To make thy Fall more dreadful. Why haſt thou ſlain Thy Friend ? thy only Stay for ſinking Greatneſs ? What Frenzy, what blind Fury did poſlels thee, To cut off thy right Hand; and fling it from thee ? For fuch was ZEcins,
Ezep. Yes, and ſuch art thou; Joynt Traitorsto my Empire and my Glory. Put up thy Sword ; be gone for ever, leave me, Tho? Traitor, yet becauſe I once did wrong thee, Live like a vagrant Slave. I baniſh thee.
Max. Hold me you Gods ; and judg our Paſſions rightly, Leſt Iſhould kill im: kill this luxurious Worm, Ere yet a thought of Danger has awak'd him. End him evenin the midſt of night-Debauches, Mounted upon a Trrpos, drinking Healths With ſhailow Raſcals, Pimps, Butjoons and Bawds, Who with vile Laughter take him in their Arms, And bear the drunken Ceſar to his Bed, Where to the ſcandal of all Majeſty, At every graſp he belches Provinces, Kiſſes oft Fame, and at the Empires ruine, Enjoys tis coſtly Whore.
Emp. Peace Tranor, or thou dy (t.
Tho
rn nee men — mm AE a IN
VALENTINEAN A Tho! pale Lacina ſhould direct thy Sword, 79 ; I yrs affault theeif thou offer more. : | : Max. More ? By the immorta Fatt as Fle rouze thee Cale if ſtrong = tg awake thee z It thou hadſt ever fence of Romar Honour Or th' imperial Genius ever warm'd thee. - —_— wo thou ER thus ? for all my Service y toys, my Frights, my Wounds in 1d W Why didft ri hu cr Garland —_—_ = That could make proud my Conqueſt? Ohye Gods!: | If there beno ſuch thing as Right or Wrong,. - - But Force alone muſt ſwallow all poſſeflion þ Then to what purpoſe in ſo long deſcents _ | Were Roman Laws obfervd or Heav'n obey d > © It (till the Great for Eafe or Vice werefornyd, Why did our firſt Kings toyl > Why was the Plow: Advanc'd to be the Pillar of the State? | Why was theluſtful Tarquiz with his Houſe - Expell'd, but for the Rape of bleeding Lucrece #- | Emp. 1 cannot bear thy words. Vext Wretch nomere.- He ſhocks me. Prithee Maxzmwue no more. 2 Reaſon no more 3 thou troubleſt me with Reafon:  /
0 —
Max. What ſervile Raſcal, what moſt abje@& Slave,” —
That lick?d the Duſt where ere his Maſter trod;
Bounded not from the Earth upon hs feet, | And ſhook his Chain, that heard of Bratzs Vengeance >” Who that ere heard the Cauſe, applauded not W-: That Romar-Spirit, for his great Revenge?
Yet mine is more, and touches me far nearer : 8 Laucrece was not his Wife as ſhe was mine, .
For ever raviſht, ever loſt Lzcina.
Emp. Ah name her not ! That Name, thy Face, and Are the three things on FarthT would avoid :— © Let me forget her, Ile forgive thee all, b 4s And give thee half rhe Empire to be gone. -- Ba
Max. Thus ſteefd with fuch = Cauſe, what Soul but mine Had not upon the infant ended thee ?*
Sworn in that moment —Ceſar isno more; And fol had. But I will telfthee Tyrant, |» To make thee hate thy Guilt, and curle thy Fears,
CIP;
Reaſon, -
Cre EO ein -
Rr err ye nm OS — wwe ren nr
——_ 7 ——————_—_—_—— ———— ———— ———— _ — ———__
3 The TRAGEDY of
Fins, whom thou haſt ſlain, prevented me; Aicizs, who on this bloody Spot lyes murder'd By barb'cous Czfer, watcht my vow'd Revenge, And from my Sword preſerv'd ungrateful Ceſar. Emp. How then darlit thou, viewing this great Example, With impious Arms affault thy Emperor ? Max. Becauſe I have more Wit than Honeſty, More of thy ſelf, more Villany than Vertue, More Paftion, more Revenge, and more Ambition, Than fooliſh Honour, and fantaſtick Glory. What ſhare your Empire? Suffer you to hive ?- After the impious Wrongs I have receiv'd, Couldft thou thus lull me, thou might laugh indeed. Ezep. T am fatisfy'd that thou didſt ever hate me, Thy Wifes Rape therefore was an act of Juſtice, And ſo far thou haſt eagd my-tender Conſcience. Therefore to hopea Friendſhip from.thee now, Were vain to me, asis the Worlds-Continuance, Where ſolid pains ſacceed ourſcnflefs joys, And ſhort-liv'd pleaſures fleet like paſhing Dreams. ZEcias, I mournthy Fate as much as man Can doin my condition, that am going, And therefore ſhould be bufie with my ſelf: Yetto thy memory I will alow | Some grains of Time, and drop ſome forrowing Tears. Oh Ecizs ! oh ! Max. Why this is right, my Lord, And if theſe Drops are orient, you will fet True C2far, glorious in your going down, Tho? all the Journey of your Life was cloudy. Allow at leaſt a Poſhbility, Where Thought is loſt, and think there may be Gods, An unknown Countrey after you are'dead, As well as there was oneere you were born. Emp. Tve thought enough, and with that thought reſolve
To mount Imperial from the burning Pile.
Pgrieve for Atcixs | Yes, I mourn him, Gods, As if I had metray Father inthe dark, And ſtriving for the Way had murder'd him. Ok ſach a fairhful Friend! that when be knew
nn
—
VALENTINIAN we |
I hated him, and had contriv'd his Death <= Yet then he ran tis Heart upon my Swotd - ; way * 0; Lie Proge of dying Love. ax. [15 now littime, Fvew |
Elfe at my entrance with a banal Bee gre fon we, 4, tcIVd y on like a Victim for the Altar |
ot warn'd you thus, and arm'd you for As if when ere Fate calld a Ceſar mg OG The judging Gods lookt down to mark his dy;
Emp. Oh ſubtil Traitor ! how he dallies with the Think not thou ſawcy Counſellor, my Slave, - : Tho' at this moment I ſhould feel thy Foot Upon my Neck, and Sword within my Bowels That I would ask a Life from thee. No Villain, When once the Emperor is at thy Command, Power, Life and Glory. muſt take leave for ever. Therefore prepare the utmoſt of thy malice z But to torment thee more, and ſhew how little All thy Revenge can do, appears to Ceſar. Would the Gods raiſe Lzc;»a from the Grave, And fetter thee but while I nught enjoy her, Before thy Face I'd raviſh her again.
Max. Hark, hark Aretus, and the Legions come.
Emp. Come all, Aretzs, and the Rebel Legions ; Let ZEcins too part from the Gaol of Death, And run the flying race of Life again. Fle be the foremoſt {till, and ſnatch freſh Glory To my laſt Gaſp, from the contending World ; Garlands and Crowns too ſhall attend my Dying 3 Statuesand Temples, Altars ſhall be rais'd YL To my great Name, while your more vile Inſcriptions Time Tots, and mouldring Clay is all your Portion.
Enter Aretus and Souldiers. They kill the Emperor. Max. Lead ine to Death or Empire, which you plea, © |
For both are equal to a ruin'd mans — But ſellow-Souldiers, if you are my Friends, Bring me to Neath, that | may there find peace,
Since Empire is too poor to mn amends
[ Hd bk out + 1-48) £3 HAR 4 a Pe 64 ea bel TH 709 PSP FOO RATE et I0 FTI 4 hab EET I Tn 9's Ou! by 8 q t "a To & YA k . * - s
$2 - The TRAGEDY, ec.
- Forhalfthe Loſſes Thave undergone, '
A true Friend and a tender faithful Wife,
The two bleſt Miracles of humane Life. | ih Go now andſeck new. Worlds to addto this y Search Heav*n for Bleſſings toenrich the gift, -
Bring Power and Pleafare on the wings of Fame,
And heapthis Treaſure upon Maximms, *
You'l make a great man not a happy one 3
Sorrows ſo juſt as mine muſt never end,
For my Love raviſh'd, and my-murderd Friend. 8 {Ex. oznes.
*
Each had her Valentinian i ber heart.
Written by a Perſon of Quality.
; IS well the Scene is laid remote from hems.
| *T would bring in queſtion elſe ng » => Two monſtrous things, produc'd for this our Age, And no where to be ſeen but on the Sage. |
A Woman raviſht, anil « Great man wiſe,
Nay honeſt too, without the leaſt diſguiſe. ,
Another Charater deſerves great blame,
A Cuckold daring to revenge his ſhame. | Surly, ill-natur'd Roman, wanting wit, Angry when all true Engliſhmen ſabair, _ c Witneſs the Horns of the well-headed Pit. -
Tell me ye fair ones, pray now tell me, why : MINED
: Fd
For fuch a fanlt as this to bid me dye.
'Twould ſpoil our Audience for the next new Play Too many wanting who are here to day.
For I fuppoſe if erethat hapned to yee,
Should Husbands thus command, and Wives ge
Twas force prevailed, yee ſaid he would undo yee. Struggling, cried out, but all alas in vain,
Like me yee underwent the killing pain. Did you not pity me, lament each groan, When: left with the wild Emperor alone ? T know in thought yee kindly bore a part,
—
- -
