Canonical Title: THE VIRGIN MARTYR
Requested Title: THE VIRGIN MARTYR
Authors: John Suckling; Thomas Dekker and Philip Massinger | Thomas Dekker and Philip Massinger
Source Site: Internet Archive
Identifier: TheVirginMartyr
Item Title: The Virgin Martyr
Item Creator: Massinger, Philip, 1583-1640
Item Year: 1844
Text Scope: extracted_segment
Matched Alias: THE VIRGIN MARTYR
Source URL: https://archive.org/download/TheVirginMartyr/TheVirginMartyr_djvu.txt
Harp . My head 
Answer the forfeit. 




THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


Sap. Of his victory 

There was some rumour : but it was assured, 

The army pass’d a full day’s journey higher 
Into the country. 

Harp . It was so determined ; 

But, for the further honour of your son, 

And to observe the government of the city, 

And with what rigour, or remiss indulgence, 

The Christians are pursued, he makes his stay here : 

[ Trumpets . 

For proof, his trumpets speak his near arrival. 

Sap. Haste, good Sempronius, draw up our guards, 
And with all ceremonious pomp receive 
The conquering army. Let our garrison speak 
Their welcome in loud shouts, the city show 
Her state and wealth. 

Semp. I’m gone. [Exit. 

Sap. O, I am ravish’d 

With this great honour ! cherish, good Theophilus, 
This knowing scholar. Send for your fair daughters ; 
I will present them to the emperor, 

And in their sweet conversion, as a mirror, 

Express your zeal and duty. 

Theoph . Fetch them, good Harpax. 

[Exit Harpax. 





8 


THE VIRGIN-MARTYR.. 


[Act I. 


Enter Sempronius, at the head of the guards soldiers 
leading three Icings bound; Antoninus and Ma- 
crinus bearing the emperors eagles; Dioclesian 
with a gilt laurel on his head , leading in Artemia : 
Sapritius kisses the emperor's handy then embraces 
his son ; Harpax brings in Calista and Chris- 
TETA. Loud shouts . 

Diocle . So : at all parts I find Caesarea 
Completely govern’d ; the licentious soldier 
Confined in modest limits, and the people 
Taught to obey, and not compell’d with rigour ; 

The ancient Roman discipline revived, 

Which raised Rome to her greatness, and proclaim’d 
her 

The glorious mistress of the conquer’d world ; 

But, above all, the service of the gods, 

So zealously observed, that, good Sapritius, 

In words to thank you for your care and duty, 

Were much unworthy Dioclesian’s honour. 

Or his magnificence to his loyal servants. — 

But I shall find a time with noble titles 
To recompense your merits. 

Sap . Mightiest Caesar, 

Whose power upon this globe of earth is equal 
To Jove’s in heaven ; whose victorious triumphs 





THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


On proud rebellious kings that stir against it, 

Are perfect figures of his immortal trophies 
Won in the Giants* war ; whose conquering sword, 
Guided by his strong arm, as deadly kills 
As did his thunder ! all that I have done, 

Or, if my strength were centupled, could do, 

Comes short of what my loyalty must challenge. 

But, if in anything I have deserved 
Great Caesar’s smile, *tis in my humble care 
Still to preserve the honour of those gods, 

That make him what he is : my zeal to them 
I ever have express’d in my fell hate 
Against the Christian sect that, with one blow, 
(Ascribing all things to an unknown Power,) 

Would strike down all their temples, and allows 
them 

Nor sacrifice nor altars. 

Diocle . Thou, in this, 

Walk’st hand in hand with me ; my will and power 
Shall not alone confirm, but honour all 
That are in this most forward. 

Sap. Sacred Caesar, 

If your imperial majesty stand pleased 
To shower your favours upon such as are 
The boldest champions of our religion, 




cfcoa>% 




M J 01 




1 

ill 

3 m I 
Ml 


rl 1 W'"' ,\ : 1 

HI 


THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 



Look on this reverend man, [ points to Theophilus .] to 
whom the power 

Of searching out, and punishing such delinquents, 
Was by your choice committed; and, for proof, 

He hath deserved the grace imposed upon him, 

And with a fair and even hand proceeded, 

Partial to none, not to himself, or those 
Of equal nearness to himself; behold 
This pair of virgins. 

Diocle . What are these ? 

Sap . His daughters. 

Artem. Now by your sacred fortune, they are fair 
ones, 

Exceeding fair ones : would ’twere in my power 
To make them mine ! 

Theoph . They are the gods’, great lady, 

They were most happy in your service else : 

On these, when they fell from their father’s 
faith, 

I used a judge’s power, entreaties failing 
(They being seduced) to win them to adore 
The holy powers we worship ; I put on 
The scarlet robe of bold authority, 

And, as they had been strangers to my blood, 
Presented them in the most horrid form, 


Digitized by Google 


THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


All kind of tortures ; part of which they suffer’d 
With Roman constancy. 

Artem . And could you endure, 

Being a father, to behold their limbs 
Extended on the rack ? 

Theoph. I did ; but must 
Confess there was a strange contention in me, 
Between the impartial office of a judge, 

And pity of a father ; to help justice 
Religion stept in, under which odds 
Compassion fell : — yet still I was a father. 

For e’en then, when the flinty hangman’s whips 
Were worn with stripes spent on their tender limbs, 
I kneel’d, and wept, and begg’d them, though they 
would 

Be cruel to themselves, they would take pity 
On my gray hairs ; now note a sudden change, 
Which I with joy remember ; those, whom torture, 
Nor fear of death, could terrify, were o’ercome 
By seeing of my sufferings ; and so won, 

Returning to the faith that they were bom in, 

I gave them to the gods. And be assured 
I that used justice with a rigorous hand, 

Upon such beauteous virgins, and mine own, 

Will use no favour, where the cause commands me, 




12 THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. [Act I. 

To any other ; hut, as rocks, he deaf 
To all entreaties. 

Diocle. Thou deserv’st thy place ; 

Still hold it, and with honour. Things thus order’d 
Touching the gods, ’tis lawful to descend 
To human cares, and exercise that power 
Heaven has conferr’d upon me ; — which that you. 
Rebels and traitors to the power of Rome, 

Should not with all extremities undergo, 

What can you urge to qualify your crimes, 

Or mitigate my anger ? 

K. of Epire. We are now 
Slaves to thy power, that yesterday were kings, 

And had command o’er others ; we confess 
Our grandsires paid yours tribute, yet left us, 

As their forefathers had, desire of freedom. 

And, if you Romans hold it glorious honour, 

Not only to defend what is your own, 

But to enlarge your empire, (though our fortune 
Denies that happiness,) who can accuse 
The famish’d mouth, if it attempt to feed ? 

Or such, whose fetters eat into their freedoms, 

If they desire to shake them off? 

K. of Pontus. We stand 
The last examples, to prove how uncertain 


8c. 1.] 


THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


IS 


All human happiness is ; and are prepared 
To endure the worst. 

K. of Macedon . That spoke, which now is highest 
In Fortune’s wheel, must, when she turns it next, 
Decline as low as we are. This consider’d 
Taught the -Egyptian Hercules, Sesostris, 

That had his chariot drawn by captive kings, 

To free them from that slavery; — but to hope 
Such mercy from a Roman were mere madness : 

We are familiar with what cruelty 
Rome, since her infant greatness, ever used 
Such as she triumph’d over ; age nor sex 
Exempted from her tyranny ; sceptre’d princes 
Kept in her common dungeons, and their children, 
In scorn train’d up in base mechanic arts, 

For public bondmen. In the catalogue 
Of those unfortunate men, we expect to have 
Our names remember’d. 

Diocle . In all growing empires, 

Even cruelty is useful ; some must suffer, 

And be set up examples to strike terror 
In others, though far off: but, when a state 
Is raised to her perfection, and her bases 
Too firm to shrink, or yield, we may use mercy, 
And do’t with safety ; but to whom ? not cowards, 








J 14 THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. [Act I . 

' Or such whose baseness shames the conqueror, 

And robs him of his victory, as weak Perseus 
Did great iEmilius. Know, therefore, kings 
Of Epire, Pontus, and of Macedon, 

That I with courtesy can use my prisoners, 

As well as make them mine by force, provided 
That they are noble enemies : such I found you, 
Before I made you mine ; and, since you were so, 
You have not lost the courages of princes, 

Although the fortune. Had you borne yourselves 
Dejectedly, and base, no slavery 
Had been too easy for you : but such is 
The power of noble valour, that we love it 
Even in our enemies, and taken with it, 

Desire to make them friends, as 1 will you. 

K. of Epire. Mock us not, Caesar. 

Diode. By the gods, I do not. 

Unloose their bonds : — I now as friends embrace you. 
Give them their crowns again. 

K. of Pontus. We are twice o’ercome ; 

By courage, and by courtesy. 

K. of Macedon. But this latter 
Shall teach us to live ever faithful vassals 
To Dioclesian, and the power of Rome. 

K. of Epire. All kingdoms fall before her ! 


Sc. 1.] THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 

K . of Pontus . And all kings 
Contend to honour Caesar ! 

ZHocle. I believe 

Your tongues are the true trumpets of your hearts, 
And in it I most happy. Queen of fate, 

Imperious Fortune ! mix some light disaster 
With my so many joys, to season them, 

And give them sweeter relish : I’m girt round 
With true felicity ; faithful subjects here, 

Here bold commanders, here with new-made friends : 
But, what’s the crown of all, in thee, Artemia, 

My only child, whose love to me and duty, 

Strive to exceed each other ! 

Artem . I make payment 
But of a debt, which I stand bound to tender 
As a daughter and a subject. 

Diocle . Which requires yet 
A retribution from me, Artemia, 

Tied by a father’s care, how to bestow 
A jewel, of all things to me most precious : 

Nor will I therefore longer keep thee from 
The chief joys of creation, marriage rites; 

Which, that thou may’st with greater pleasures taste 
of, 

Thou shalt not like with mine eyes, but thine own. 






THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 



| Among these kings, forgetting they were captives ; 
Or those, remembering not they are my subjects, 
Make choice of any : By Jove’s dreadful thunder, 
My will shall rank with thine, 

Artem . It is a bounty 

The daughters of great princes seldom meet with ; 
For they, to make up breaches in the state. 

Or for some other public ends, are forced 
\ To match where they affect not. May my life 
Deserve this favour ! 

Diocle . Speak ; I long to know 
The man thou wilt make happy. 

Artem . If that titles, 

Or the adored name of Queen could take me, 

Here would I fix mine eyes, and look no further ; 
But these are baits to take a mean-born lady, 

Not her that boldly may call Caesar father : 

In that I can bring honour unto any, 
i But from no king that lives receive addition : 

To raise desert and virtue by my fortune, 

Though in a low estate, were greater glory, 

Than to mix greatness with a prince that owns 
j No worth but that name only. 

Diocle . I commend thee ; 

Tis like myself. 




THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


Artem. If, then, of men beneath me, 

By choice is to he made, where shall I seek 
But among those that best deserve from you ? 

That have served you most faithfully ; that in dangers 
Have stood next to you ; that have interposed 
Their breasts as shields of proof, to dull the swords 
Aim’d at your bosom ; that have spent their blood 
To crown your brows with laurel ? 

Macr . Cytherea, 

Great Queen of Love, be now propitious to me ! 
Harp . [to Sap.'] Now mark what I foretold. 

Anton . Her eye ’s on me. 

Fair Venus’ son, draw forth a leaden dart, 

And, that she may hate me, transfix her with it ; 

Or, if thou needs wilt use a golden one, 

Shoot it in the behalf of any other : 

Thou know’st I am thy votary elsewhere. [Aside. 
Artem. [advances to Anton.] Sir. 

Theoph. How he blushes ! 

Sap. Welcome, fool, thy fortune. 

Stand like a block when such an angel courts thee ! 

Artem. I am no object to divert your eye 
From the beholding. 

Anton. Rather a bright sun, 

Too glorious for him to gaze upon, 




Digitized by Google 



THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


[Act I. 


That took not first flight from the eagle’s aerie, 

As I look on the temples, or the gods, 

And with that reverence, lady, I behold you, 

And shall do ever. 

Artem. And it will become you, 

While thus we stand at distance ; but, if love, 

Love borne out of the assurance of your virtues, 
Teach me to stoop so low — 

Anton . O, rather take 
A higher flight. 

A rtem . Why, fear you to be raised ? 

Say I put off the dreadful awe that waits 
On majesty, or with you share my beams, 

Nay, make you to outshine me ; change the name 
Of Subject into Lord, rob you of service 
That ’s due from you to me, and in me make it 
Duty to honour you, would you refuse me ? 

Anton . Refuse you, madam! such a worm as 
I am 

Refuse what kings upon their knees would sue for ! 
Call it, great lady, by another name ; 

An humble modesty, that would not match 
A molehill with Olympus. 

Artem. He that’s famous 
For honourable actions in the war. 


>gle 







THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


As you are, Antoninus, a proved soldier, 

Is fellow to a king. 

Anton . If you love valour, 

As ’tis a kingly virtue, seek it out, 

And cherish it in a king ; there it shines brightest, 
And yields the bravest lustre. Look on Epire, 

A prince, in whom it is incorporate ; 

And let it not disgrace him that he was 
O’ercome by Caesar ; it was victory, 

To stand so long against him : had you seen him, 
How in one bloody scene he did discharge 
The parts of a commander and a soldier, 

Wise in direction, bold in execution ; 

You would have said, Great Caesar’s self excepted, 
The world yields not his equal. 

Artem. Yet I have heard, 

Encountering him alone in the head of his troop, 
You took him prisoner. 

K. of Epire. ’Tis a truth, great princess : 

I ’ll not detract from valour. 

Anton. ’Twas mere fortune ; 

Courage had no hand in it. 

Theoph. Did ever man 
Strive so against his own good ? 

Sap. Spiritless villain ! 


Digitized by 


Google 



H 


wu 

ftl 


Mi 


1 

w 

M 


20 THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. [ 

How I am tortured ! By the immortal gods, 

I now could kill him. 

Diocle . Hold, Sapritius, hold, 

On our displeasure, hold ! 

Harp . Why, this would make 
A father mad ; ’tis not to be endured ; 

Your honour’s tainted in’t. 

Sap . By heaven, it is : 

I shall think of it. 

Harp . ’Tis not to be forgotten. 

Artem. Nay, kneel not, sir ; I am no ravisher, 
Nor so far gone in fond affection to you, 

But that I can retire, my honour safe : — 

Yet say, hereafter, that thou hast neglected 
What, but seen in possession of another, 

Will make thee mad with envy. 

A nton. In her looks 
Revenge is written. 

Mac. As you love your life, 

Study Jo appease her. 

Anton. Gracious madam, hear me. 

Artem. And be again refused ? 

Anton. The tender of 

My life, my service, or, since you vouchsafe it, 
My love, my heart, my all : and pardon me, 


Digitized by Google 



Sc. 1.] THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 21 

Pardon, dread princess, that I made some scruple 
To leave a valley of security, 

To mount up to the hill of majesty, 

On which, the nearer Jove, the nearer lightning. 
What knew I, but your grace made trial of me ; 
Durst I presume to embrace, where but to touch 
With an unmanner’d hand was death ? The fox, 
When he saw first the forest’s king, the lion, 

Was almost dead with fear ; the second view 
Only a little daunted him ; the third, 

He durst salute him boldly : pray you, apply this ; 
And you shall find a little time will teach me 
To look with more familiar eyes upon you, 

Than duty yet allows me. 

Sap. Well excused. 

Artem . You may redeem all yet. 

Diode . And, that he may 
Have means and opportunity to do so, 

Artemia, I leave you my substitute 
In fair Caesarea. 

Sap. And here, as yourself, 

We will obey and serve her. 

Diode . Antoninus, 

So you prove hers, I wish no other heir ; 

Think on’t: — be careful of your charge, Theophilus; 




THE VIRGIN-MARTYR. 


m 




mmi 


!&w 

!p|j 

m 

iesmi 

JmH 

FtlraKl 




Sapritius, be you my daughter’s guardian. 

Your company I wish, confederate princes, 

In our Dalmatian wars : which finished 
With victory I hope, and Maximinus,
